making such a to-do about money and greatness. There is no reason on
earth why Mr. Edward and Lucy should not marry; for I am sure Mrs.
Ferrars may afford to do very well by her son, and though Lucy has
next to nothing herself, she knows better than any body how to make
the most of every thing; I dare say, if Mrs. Ferrars would only allow
him five hundred a-year, she would make as good an appearance with it
as any body else would with eight. Lord! how snug they might live in
such another cottage as yours--or a little bigger--with two maids, and
two men; and I believe I could help them to a housemaid, for my Betty
has a sister out of place, that would fit them exactly."

Here Mrs. Jennings ceased, and as Elinor had had time enough to
collect her thoughts, she was able to give such an answer, and make
such observations, as the subject might naturally be supposed to
produce. Happy to find that she was not suspected of any extraordinary
interest in it; that Mrs. Jennings (as she had of late often hoped
might be the case) had ceased to imagine her at all attached to
Edward; and happy above all the rest, in the absence of Marianne, she
felt very well able to speak of the affair without embarrassment, and
to give her judgment, as she believed, with impartiality on the
conduct of every one concerned in it.

She could hardly determine what her own expectation of its event
really was; though she earnestly tried to drive away the notion of its
being possible to end otherwise at last, than in the marriage of
Edward and Lucy. What Mrs. Ferrars would say and do, though there
could not be a doubt of its nature, she was anxious to hear; and still
more anxious to know how Edward would conduct himself. For _him_ she
felt much compassion;--for Lucy very little--and it cost her some
pains to procure that little;--for the rest of the party none at all.

As Mrs. Jennings could talk on no other subject, Elinor soon saw the
necessity of preparing Marianne for its discussion. No time was to be
lost in undeceiving her, in making her acquainted with the real truth,
and in endeavouring to bring her to hear it talked of by others,
without betraying that she felt any uneasiness for her sister, or any
resentment against Edward.

Elinor's office was a painful one. She was going to remove what she
really believed to be her sister's chief consolation,--to give such
particulars of Edward as she feared would ruin him for ever in her
good opinion,-and to make Marianne, by a resemblance in their
situations, which to _her_ fancy would seem strong, feel all her own
disappointment over again. But unwelcome as such a task must be, it
was necessary to be done, and Elinor therefore hastened to perform it.

She was very far from wishing to dwell on her own feelings, or to
represent herself as suffering much, any otherwise than as the
self-command she had practised since her first knowledge of Edward's
engagement, might suggest a hint of what was practicable to Marianne.
Her narration was clear and simple; and though it could not be given
without emotion, it was not accompanied by violent agitation, nor
impetuous grief. _That_ belonged rather to the hearer, for Marianne
listened with horror, and cried excessively. Elinor was to be the
comforter of others in her own distresses, no less than in theirs; and
all the comfort that could be given by assurances of her own composure
of mind, and a very earnest vindication of Edward from every charge
but of imprudence, was readily offered.

But Marianne for some time would give credit to neither. Edward seemed
a second Willoughby; and acknowledging as Elinor did, that she _had_
loved him most sincerely, could she feel less than herself! As for
Lucy Steele, she considered her so totally unamiable, so absolutely
incapable of attaching a sensible man, that she could not be persuaded
at first to believe, and afterwards to pardon, any former affection of
Edward for her. She would not even admit it to have been natural; and
Elinor left her to be convinced that it was so, by that which only
could convince her, a better knowledge of mankind.

Her first communication had reached no farther than to state the fact
of the engagement, and the length of time it had existed. Marianne's
feelings had then broken in, and put an end to all regularity of
detail; and for some time all that could be done was to soothe her
distress, lessen her alarms, and combat her resentment. The first
question on her side, which led to farther particulars, was--

"How long has this been known to you, Elinor? has he written to you?"

"I have known it these four months. When Lucy first came to Barton
Park last November, she told me in confidence of her engagement."

At these words, Marianne's eyes expressed the astonishment which her
lips could not utter. After a pause of wonder, she exclaimed--

"Four months!--Have you known of this four months?"

Elinor confirmed it.

"What!--while attending me in all my misery, has this been on your
heart?--And I have reproached you for being happy!"--

"It was not fit that you should then know how much I was the reverse!"

"Four months!" cried Marianne again. "So calm! so cheerful! how have
you been supported?"

"By feeling that I was doing my duty. My promise to Lucy, obliged me
to be secret. I owed it to her, therefore, to avoid giving any hint of
the truth; and I owed it to my family and friends, not to create in
them a solicitude about me, which it could not be in my power to
satisfy."

Marianne seemed much struck.

"I have very often wished to undeceive yourself and my mother," added
Elinor; "and once or twice I have attempted it; but without betraying
my trust, I never could have convinced you."

"Four months! and yet you loved him!"

"Yes. But I did not love only him;--and while the comfort of others
was dear to me, I was glad to spare them from knowing how much I felt.
Now, I can think and speak of it with little emotion. I would not have
you suffer on my account; for I assure you I no longer suffer
materially myself. I have many things to support me. I am not
conscious of having provoked the disappointment by any imprudence of
my own, I have borne it as much as possible without spreading it
farther. I acquit Edward of essential misconduct. I wish him very
happy; and I am so sure of his always doing his duty, that though now
he may harbour some regret, in the end he must become so. Lucy does
not want sense, and that is the foundation on which every thing good
may be built. And after all, Marianne, after all that is bewitching in
the idea of a single and constant attachment, and all that can be said
of one's happiness depending entirely on any particular person, it is
not meant--it is not fit--it is not possible that it should be so.
Edward will marry Lucy; he will marry a woman superior in person and
understanding to half her sex; and time and habit will teach him to
forget that he ever thought another superior to _her._"

"If such is your way of thinking," said Marianne, "if the loss of what
is most valued is so easily to be made up by something else, your
resolution, your self-command, are, perhaps, a little less to be
wondered at. They are brought more within my comprehension."

"I understand you. You do not suppose that I have ever felt much. For
four months, Marianne, I have had all this hanging on my mind, without
being at liberty to speak of it to a single creature; knowing that it
would make you and my mother most unhappy whenever it were explained
to you, yet unable to prepare you for it in the least. It was told
me,--it was in a manner forced on me by the very person herself, whose
prior engagement ruined all my prospects; and told me, as I thought,
with triumph. This person's suspicions, therefore, I have had to
oppose, by endeavouring to appear indifferent where I have been most
deeply interested;--and it has not been only once;--I have had her
hopes and exultation to listen to again and again. I have known myself
to be divided from Edward for ever, without hearing one circumstance
that could make me less desire the connection. Nothing has proved him
unworthy; nor has anything declared him indifferent to me. I have had
to contend against the unkindness of his sister, and the insolence of
his mother; and have suffered the punishment of an attachment, without
enjoying its advantages. And all this has been going on at a time,
when, as you know too well, it has not been my only unhappiness. If
you can think me capable of ever feeling, surely you may suppose that
I have suffered _now._ The composure of mind with which I have brought
myself at present to consider the matter, the consolation that I have
been willing to admit, have been the effect of constant and painful
exertion; they did not spring up of themselves; they did not occur to
relieve my spirits at first. No, Marianne. _Then_, if I had not been
bound to silence, perhaps nothing could have kept me entirely--not
even what I owed to my dearest friends--from openly showing that I was
_very_ unhappy."--

Marianne was quite subdued.

"Oh! Elinor," she cried, "you have made me hate myself for ever. How
barbarous have I been to you!--you, who have been my only comfort, who
have borne with me in all my misery, who have seemed to be only
suffering for me! Is this my gratitude? Is this the only return I can
make you? Because your merit cries out upon myself, I have been trying
to do it away."

The tenderest caresses followed this confession. In such a frame of
mind as she was now in, Elinor had no difficulty in obtaining from her
whatever promise she required; and at her request, Marianne engaged
never to speak of the affair to any one with the least appearance of
bitterness;--to meet Lucy without betraying the smallest increase of
dislike to her;--and even to see Edward himself, if chance should
bring them together, without any diminution of her usual cordiality.
These were great concessions;--but where Marianne felt that she had
injured, no reparation could be too much for her to make.

She performed her promise of being discreet, to admiration. She
attended to all that Mrs. Jennings had to say upon the subject, with
an unchanging complexion, dissented from her in nothing, and was heard
three times to say, "Yes, ma'am."--She listened to her praise of Lucy
with only moving from one chair to another, and when Mrs. Jennings
talked of Edward's affection, it cost her only a spasm in her throat.
Such advances towards heroism in her sister, made Elinor feel equal to
any thing herself.

The next morning brought a farther trial of it, in a visit from their
brother, who came with a most serious aspect to talk over the dreadful
affair, and bring them news of his wife.

"You have heard, I suppose," said he with great solemnity, as soon as
he was seated, "of the very shocking discovery that took place under
our roof yesterday."

They all looked their assent; it seemed too awful a moment for speech.

[Illustration: "_You have heard, I suppose._"]

"Your sister," he continued, "has suffered dreadfully. Mrs. Ferrars
too--in short it has been a scene of such complicated distress--but
I will hope that the storm may be weathered without our being any of
us quite overcome. Poor Fanny! she was in hysterics all yesterday. But
I would not alarm you too much. Donavan says there is nothing
materially to be apprehended; her constitution is a good one, and her
resolution equal to any thing. She has borne it all, with the
fortitude of an angel! She says she never shall think well of anybody
again; and one cannot wonder at it, after being so deceived!--meeting
with such ingratitude, where so much kindness had been shown, so much
confidence had been placed! It was quite out of the benevolence of her
heart, that she had asked these young women to her house; merely
because she thought they deserved some attention, were harmless,
well-behaved girls, and would be pleasant companions; for otherwise we
both wished very much to have invited you and Marianne to be with us,
while your kind friend there, was attending her daughter. And now to
be so rewarded! 'I wish, with all my heart,' says poor Fanny in her
affectionate way, 'that we had asked your sisters instead of them.'"

Here he stopped to be thanked; which being done, he went on.

"What poor Mrs. Ferrars suffered, when first Fanny broke it to her, is
not to be described. While she with the truest affection had been
planning a most eligible connection for him, was it to be supposed
that he could be all the time secretly engaged to another
person!--such a suspicion could never have entered her head! If she
suspected _any_ prepossession elsewhere, it could not be in _that_
quarter. '_There_ to be sure,' said she, 'I might have thought myself
safe.' She was quite in an agony. We consulted together, however, as
to what should be done, and at last she determined to send for Edward.
He came. But I am sorry to relate what ensued. All that Mrs. Ferrars
could say to make him put an end to the engagement, assisted too as
you may well suppose by my arguments, and Fanny's entreaties, was of
no avail. Duty, affection, every thing was disregarded. I never
thought Edward so stubborn, so unfeeling before. His mother explained
to him her liberal designs, in case of his marrying Miss Morton; told
him she would settle on him the Norfolk estate, which, clear of
land-tax, brings in a good thousand a-year; offered even, when matters
grew desperate, to make it twelve hundred; and in opposition to this,
if he still persisted in this low connection, represented to him the
certain penury that must attend the match. His own two thousand pounds
she protested should be his all; she would never see him again; and so
far would she be from affording him the smallest assistance, that if
he were to enter into any profession with a view of better support,
she would do all in her power to prevent him advancing in it."

Here Marianne, in an ecstasy of indignation, clapped her hands
together, and cried, "Gracious God! can this be possible!"

"Well may you wonder, Marianne," replied her brother, "at the
obstinacy which could resist such arguments as these. Your exclamation
is very natural."

Marianne was going to retort, but she remembered her promises, and
forbore.

"All this, however," he continued, "was urged in vain. Edward said
very little; but what he did say, was in the most determined manner.
Nothing should prevail on him to give up his engagement. He would
stand to it, cost him what it might."

"Then," cried Mrs. Jennings with blunt sincerity, no longer able to be
silent, "he has acted like an honest man! I beg your pardon, Mr.
Dashwood, but if he had done otherwise, I should have thought him a
rascal. I have some little concern in the business, as well as
yourself, for Lucy Steele is my cousin, and I believe there is not a
better kind of girl in the world, nor one who more deserves a good
husband."

John Dashwood was greatly astonished; but his nature was calm, not
open to provocation, and he never wished to offend anybody, especially
anybody of good fortune. He therefore replied, without any
resentment--

"I would by no means speak disrespectfully of any relation of yours,
madam. Miss Lucy Steele is, I dare say, a very deserving young woman,
but in the present case you know, the connection must be impossible.
And to have entered into a secret engagement with a young man under
her uncle's care, the son of a woman especially of such very large
fortune as Mrs. Ferrars, is perhaps, altogether a little
extraordinary. In short, I do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour
of any person whom you have a regard for, Mrs. Jennings. We all wish
her extremely happy; and Mrs. Ferrars's conduct throughout the whole,
has been such as every conscientious, good mother, in like
circumstances, would adopt. It has been dignified and liberal. Edward
has drawn his own lot, and I fear it will be a bad one."

Marianne sighed out her similar apprehension; and Elinor's heart wrung
for the feelings of Edward, while braving his mother's threats, for a
woman who could not reward him.

"Well, sir," said Mrs. Jennings, "and how did it end?"

"I am sorry to say, ma'am, in a most unhappy rupture:--Edward is
dismissed for ever from his mother's notice. He left her house
yesterday, but where he is gone, or whether he is still in town, I do
not know; for _we_ of course can make no inquiry."

"Poor young man!--and what is to become of him?"

"What, indeed, ma'am! It is a melancholy consideration. Born to the
prospect of such affluence! I cannot conceive a situation more
deplorable. The interest of two thousand pounds--how can a man live on
it?--and when to that is added the recollection, that he might, but
for his own folly, within three months have been in the receipt of two
thousand, five hundred a-year (for Miss Morton has thirty thousand
pounds,) I cannot picture to myself a more wretched condition. We must
all feel for him; and the more so, because it is totally out of our
power to assist him."

"Poor young man!" cried Mrs. Jennings, "I am sure he should be very
welcome to bed and board at my house; and so I would tell him if I
could see him. It is not fit that he should be living about at his own
charge now, at lodgings and taverns."

Elinor's heart thanked her for such kindness towards Edward, though
she could not forbear smiling at the form of it.

"If he would only have done as well by himself," said John Dashwood,
"as all his friends were disposed to do by him, he might now have been
in his proper situation, and would have wanted for nothing. But as it
is, it must be out of anybody's power to assist him. And there is one
thing more preparing against him, which must be worse than all--his
mother has determined, with a very natural kind of spirit, to settle
_that_ estate upon Robert immediately, which might have been Edward's,
on proper conditions. I left her this morning with her lawyer,
talking over the business."

[Illustration: _Talking over the business._]

"Well!" said Mrs. Jennings, "that is _her_ revenge. Everybody has a
way of their own. But I don't think mine would be, to make one son
independent, because another had plagued me."

Marianne got up and walked about the room.

"Can anything be more galling to the spirit of a man," continued John,
"than to see his younger brother in possession of an estate which
might have been his own? Poor Edward! I feel for him sincerely."

A few minutes more spent in the same kind of effusion, concluded his
visit; and with repeated assurances to his sisters that he really
believed there was no material danger in Fanny's indisposition, and
that they need not therefore be very uneasy about it, he went away;
leaving the three ladies unanimous in their sentiments on the present
occasion, as far at least as it regarded Mrs. Ferrars's conduct, the
Dashwoods', and Edward's.

Marianne's indignation burst forth as soon as he quitted the room; and
as her vehemence made reserve impossible in Elinor, and unnecessary in
Mrs. Jennings, they all joined in a very spirited critique upon the
party.




CHAPTER XXXVIII


Mrs. Jennings was very warm in her praise of Edward's conduct, but
only Elinor and Marianne understood its true merit. _They_ only knew
how little he had had to tempt him to be disobedient, and how small
was the consolation, beyond the consciousness of doing right, that
could remain to him in the loss of friends and fortune. Elinor gloried
in his integrity; and Marianne forgave all his offences in compassion
for his punishment. But though confidence between them was, by this
public discovery, restored to its proper state, it was not a subject
on which either of them were fond of dwelling when alone. Elinor
avoided it upon principle, as tending to fix still more upon her
thoughts, by the too warm, too positive assurances of Marianne, that
belief of Edward's continued affection for herself which she rather
wished to do away; and Marianne's courage soon failed her, in trying
to converse upon a topic which always left her more dissatisfied with
herself than ever, by the comparison it necessarily produced between
Elinor's conduct and her own.

She felt all the force of that comparison; but not as her sister had
hoped, to urge her to exertion now; she felt it with all the pain of
continual self-reproach, regretted most bitterly that she had never
exerted herself before; but it brought only the torture of penitence,
without the hope of amendment. Her mind was so much weakened that she
still fancied present exertion impossible, and therefore it only
dispirited her more.

Nothing new was heard by them, for a day or two afterwards, of affairs
in Harley Street, or Bartlett's Buildings. But though so much of the
matter was known to them already, that Mrs. Jennings might have had
enough to do in spreading that knowledge farther, without seeking
after more, she had resolved from the first to pay a visit of comfort
and inquiry to her cousins as soon as she could; and nothing but the
hindrance of more visitors than usual, had prevented her going to them
within that time.

The third day succeeding their knowledge of the particulars, was so
fine, so beautiful a Sunday as to draw many to Kensington Gardens,
though it was only the second week in March. Mrs. Jennings and Elinor
were of the number; but Marianne, who knew that the Willoughbys were
again in town, and had a constant dread of meeting them, chose rather
to stay at home, than venture into so public a place.

An intimate acquaintance of Mrs. Jennings joined them soon after they
entered the Gardens, and Elinor was not sorry that by her continuing
with them, and engaging all Mrs. Jennings's conversation, she was
herself left to quiet reflection. She saw nothing of the Willoughbys,
nothing of Edward, and for some time nothing of anybody who could by
any chance whether grave or gay, be interesting to her. But at last
she found herself with some surprise, accosted by Miss Steele, who,
though looking rather shy, expressed great satisfaction in meeting
them, and on receiving encouragement from the particular kindness of
Mrs. Jennings, left her own party for a short time, to join their's.
Mrs. Jennings immediately whispered to Elinor--

"Get it all out of her, my dear. She will tell you any thing if you
ask. You see I cannot leave Mrs. Clarke."

It was lucky, however, for Mrs. Jennings's curiosity and Elinor's too,
that she would tell any thing _without_ being asked; for nothing would
otherwise have been learnt.

"I am so glad to meet you;" said Miss Steele, taking her familiarly by
the arm--"for I wanted to see you of all things in the world." And
then lowering her voice, "I suppose Mrs. Jennings has heard all about
it. Is she angry?"

"Not at all, I believe, with you."

"That is a good thing. And Lady Middleton, is _she_ angry?"

"I cannot suppose it possible that she should."

"I am monstrous glad of it. Good gracious! I have had such a time of
it! I never saw Lucy in such a rage in my life. She vowed at first she
would never trim me up a new bonnet, nor do any thing else for me
again, so long as she lived; but now she is quite come to, and we are
as good friends as ever. Look, she made me this bow to my hat, and put
in the feather last night. There now, _you_ are going to laugh at me
too. But why should not I wear pink ribbons? I do not care if it _is_
the Doctor's favourite colour. I am sure, for my part, I should never
have known he _did_ like it better than any other colour, if he had
not happened to say so. My cousins have been so plaguing me! I declare
sometimes I do not know which way to look before them."

She had wandered away to a subject on which Elinor had nothing to say,
and therefore soon judged it expedient to find her way back again to
the first.

"Well, but Miss Dashwood," speaking triumphantly, "people may say what
they choose about Mr. Ferrars's declaring he would not have Lucy, for
it is no such thing I can tell you; and it is quite a shame for such
ill-natured reports to be spread abroad. Whatever Lucy might think
about it herself, you know, it was no business of other people to set
it down for certain."

"I never heard any thing of the kind hinted at before, I assure you,"
said Elinor.

[Illustration: "_She put in the feather last night._"]

"Oh, did not you? But it _was_ said, I know, very well, and by more
than one; for Miss Godby told Miss Sparks, that nobody in their senses
could expect Mr. Ferrars to give up a woman like Miss Morton, with
thirty thousand pounds to her fortune, for Lucy Steele that had
nothing at all; and I had it from Miss Sparks myself. And besides
that, my cousin Richard said himself, that when it came to the point
he was afraid Mr. Ferrars would be off; and when Edward did not come
near us for three days, I could not tell what to think myself; and I
believe in my heart Lucy gave it up all for lost; for we came away
from your brother's Wednesday, and we saw nothing of him not all
Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, and did not know what was become of
him. Once Lucy thought to write to him, but then her spirits rose
against that. However this morning he came just as we came home from
church; and then it all came out, how he had been sent for Wednesday
to Harley Street, and been talked to by his mother and all of them,
and how he had declared before them all that he loved nobody but Lucy,
and nobody but Lucy would he have. And how he had been so worried by
what passed, that as soon as he had went away from his mother's house,
he had got upon his horse, and rid into the country, some where or
other; and how he had stayed about at an inn all Thursday and Friday,
on purpose to get the better of it. And after thinking it all over and
over again, he said, it seemed to him as if, now he had no fortune,
and no nothing at all, it would be quite unkind to keep her on to the
engagement, because it must be for her loss, for he had nothing but
two thousand pounds, and no hope of any thing else; and if he was to
go into orders, as he had some thoughts, he could get nothing but a
curacy, and how was they to live upon that?--He could not bear to
think of her doing no better, and so he begged, if she had the least
mind for it, to put an end to the matter directly, and leave him shift
for himself. I heard him say all this as plain as could possibly be.
And it was entirely for _her_ sake, and upon _her_ account, that he
said a word about being off, and not upon his own. I will take my oath
he never dropt a syllable of being tired of her, or of wishing to
marry Miss Morton, or any thing like it. But, to be sure, Lucy would
not give ear to such kind of talking; so she told him directly (with a
great deal about sweet and love, you know, and all that--Oh, la! one
can't repeat such kind of things you know)--she told him directly, she
had not the least mind in the world to be off, for she could live with
him upon a trifle, and how little so ever he might have, she should be
very glad to have it all, you know, or something of the kind. So then
he was monstrous happy, and talked on some time about what they should
do, and they agreed he should take orders directly, and they must wait
to be married till he got a living. And just then I could not hear any
more, for my cousin called from below to tell me Mrs. Richardson was
come in her coach, and would take one of us to Kensington Gardens; so
I was forced to go into the room and interrupt them, to ask Lucy if
she would like to go, but she did not care to leave Edward; so I just
run up stairs and put on a pair of silk stockings and came off with
the Richardsons."

"I do not understand what you mean by interrupting them," said Elinor;
"you were all in the same room together, were not you?"

"No, indeed, not us. La! Miss Dashwood, do you think people make love
when any body else is by? Oh, for shame!--To be sure you must know
better than that. (Laughing affectedly.)--No, no; they were shut up in
the drawing-room together, and all I heard was only by listening at
the door."

"How!" cried Elinor; "have you been repeating to me what you only
learnt yourself by listening at the door? I am sorry I did not know it
before; for I certainly would not have suffered you to give me
particulars of a conversation which you ought not to have known
yourself. How could you behave so unfairly by your sister?"

"Oh, la! there is nothing in _that._ I only stood at the door, and
heard what I could. And I am sure Lucy would have done just the same
by me; for a year or two back, when Martha Sharpe and I had so many
secrets together, she never made any bones of hiding in a closet, or
behind a chimney-board, on purpose to hear what we said."

Elinor tried to talk of something else; but Miss Steele could not be
kept beyond a couple of minutes, from what was uppermost in her mind.

[Illustration: _Listening at the door._]

"Edward talks of going to Oxford soon," said she; "but now he is
lodging at No. --, Pall Mall. What an ill-natured woman his mother is,
an't she? And your brother and sister were not very kind! However, I
shan't say anything against them to _you_; and to be sure they did
send us home in their own chariot, which was more than I looked for.
And for my part, I was all in a fright for fear your sister should ask
us for the huswifes she had gave us a day or two before; but, however,
nothing was said about them, and I took care to keep mine out of
sight. Edward have got some business at Oxford, he says; so he must go
there for a time; and after _that_, as soon as he can light upon a
Bishop, he will be ordained. I wonder what curacy he will get! Good
gracious! (giggling as she spoke) I'd lay my life I know what my
cousins will say, when they hear of it. They will tell me I should
write to the Doctor, to get Edward the curacy of his new living. I
know they will; but I am sure I would not do such a thing for all the
world. 'La!' I shall say directly, 'I wonder how you could think of
such a thing? I write to the Doctor, indeed!'"

"Well," said Elinor, "it is a comfort to be prepared against the
worst. You have got your answer ready."

Miss Steele was going to reply on the same subject, but the approach
of her own party made another more necessary.

"Oh, la! here come the Richardsons. I had a vast deal more to say to
you, but I must not stay away from them not any longer. I assure you
they are very genteel people. He makes a monstrous deal of money, and
they keep their own coach. I have not time to speak to Mrs. Jennings
about it myself, but pray tell her I am quite happy to hear she is not
in anger against us, and Lady Middleton the same; and if anything
should happen to take you and your sister away, and Mrs. Jennings
should want company, I am sure we should be very glad to come and stay
with her for as long a time as she likes. I suppose Lady Middleton
won't ask us any more this bout. Good-bye; I am sorry Miss Marianne was
not here. Remember me kindly to her. La! if you have not got your
spotted muslin on!--I wonder you was not afraid of its being torn."

Such was her parting concern; for after this, she had time only to pay
her farewell compliments to Mrs. Jennings, before her company was
claimed by Mrs. Richardson; and Elinor was left in possession of
knowledge which might feed her powers of reflection some time, though
she had learnt very little more than what had been already foreseen
and foreplanned in her own mind. Edward's marriage with Lucy was as
firmly determined on, and the time of its taking place remained as
absolutely uncertain, as she had concluded it would be;--every thing
depended, exactly after her expectation, on his getting that
preferment, of which, at present, there seemed not the smallest
chance.

As soon as they returned to the carriage, Mrs. Jennings was eager for
information; but as Elinor wished to spread as little as possible
intelligence that had in the first place been so unfairly obtained,
she confined herself to the brief repetition of such simple
particulars, as she felt assured that Lucy, for the sake of her own
consequence, would choose to have known. The continuance of their
engagement, and the means that were able to be taken for promoting its
end, was all her communication; and this produced from Mrs. Jennings
the following natural remark:--

"Wait for his having a living!--ay, we all know how _that_ will
end:--they will wait a twelvemonth, and finding no good comes of it,
will set down upon a curacy of fifty pounds a-year, with the interest
of his two thousand pounds, and what little matter Mr. Steele and Mr.
Pratt can give her. Then they will have a child every year! and Lord
help 'em! how poor they will be!--I must see what I can give them
towards furnishing their house. Two maids and two men, indeed!--as I
talked of t'other day. No, no, they must get a stout girl of all
works. Betty's sister would never do for them _now._"

The next morning brought Elinor a letter by the two-penny post from
Lucy herself. It was as follows:

"Bartlett's Building, March.

     "I hope my dear Miss Dashwood will excuse the liberty I take
     of writing to her; but I know your friendship for me will
     make you pleased to hear such a good account of myself and
     my dear Edward, after all the troubles we have went through
     lately, therefore will make no more apologies, but proceed
     to say that, thank God! though we have suffered dreadfully,
     we are both quite well now, and as happy as we must always
     be in one another's love. We have had great trials, and
     great persecutions, but however, at the same time,
     gratefully acknowledge many friends, yourself not the least
     among them, whose great kindness I shall always thankfully
     remember, as will Edward too, who I have told of it. I am
     sure you will be glad to hear, as likewise dear Mrs.
     Jennings, I spent two happy hours with him yesterday
     afternoon, he would not hear of our parting, though
     earnestly did I, as I thought my duty required, urge him to
     it for prudence sake, and would have parted for ever on the
     spot, would he consent to it; but he said it should never
     be, he did not regard his mother's anger, while he could
     have my affections; our prospects are not very bright, to be
     sure, but we must wait, and hope for the best; he will be
     ordained shortly; and should it ever be in your power to
     recommend him to any body that has a living to bestow, am
     very sure you will not forget us, and dear Mrs. Jennings
     too, trust she will speak a good word for us to Sir John, or
     Mr. Palmer, or any friend that may be able to assist us.
     Poor Anne was much to blame for what she did, but she did it
     for the best, so I say nothing; hope Mrs. Jennings won't
     think it too much trouble to give us a call, should she come
     this way any morning, 'twould be a great kindness, and my
     cousins would be proud to know her. My paper reminds me to
     conclude; and begging to be most gratefully and respectfully
     remembered to her, and to Sir John, and Lady Middleton, and
     the dear children, when you chance to see them, and love to
     Miss Marianne,

"I am, etc., etc."

As soon as Elinor had finished it, she performed what she concluded to
be its writer's real design, by placing it in the hands of Mrs.
Jennings, who read it aloud with many comments of satisfaction and
praise.

"Very well indeed!--how prettily she writes!--aye, that was quite
proper to let him be off if he would. That was just like Lucy. Poor
soul! I wish I _could_ get him a living, with all my heart. She calls
me dear Mrs. Jennings, you see. She is a good-hearted girl as ever
lived. Very well upon my word. That sentence is very prettily turned.
Yes, yes, I will go and see her, sure enough. How attentive she is, to
think of every body!--Thank you, my dear, for showing it me. It is as
pretty a letter as ever I saw, and does Lucy's head and heart great
credit."




CHAPTER XXXIX


The Miss Dashwoods had now been rather more than two months in town,
and Marianne's impatience to be gone increased every day. She sighed
for the air, the liberty, the quiet of the country; and fancied that
if any place could give her ease, Barton must do it. Elinor was hardly
less anxious than herself for their removal, and only so much less
bent on its being effected immediately, as that she was conscious of
the difficulties of so long a journey, which Marianne could not be
brought to acknowledge. She began, however, seriously to turn her
thoughts towards its accomplishment, and had already mentioned their
wishes to their kind hostess, who resisted them with all the eloquence
of her good-will, when a plan was suggested, which, though detaining
them from home yet a few weeks longer, appeared to Elinor altogether
much more eligible than any other. The Palmers were to remove to
Cleveland about the end of March, for the Easter holidays; and Mrs.
Jennings, with both her friends, received a very warm invitation from
Charlotte to go with them. This would not, in itself, have been
sufficient for the delicacy of Miss Dashwood;--but it was enforced
with so much real politeness by Mr. Palmer himself, as, joined to the
very great amendment of his manners towards them since her sister had
been known to be unhappy, induced her to accept it with pleasure.

When she told Marianne what she had done, however, her first reply was
not very auspicious.

"Cleveland!"--she cried, with great agitation. "No, I cannot go to
Cleveland."--

"You forget," said Elinor gently, "that its situation is not--that it
is not in the neighbourhood of--"

"But it is in Somersetshire. I cannot go into Somersetshire. There,
where I looked forward to going;--no, Elinor, you cannot expect me to
go there."

Elinor would not argue upon the propriety of overcoming such
feelings;--she only endeavoured to counteract them by working on
others;--represented it, therefore, as a measure which would fix the
time of her returning to that dear mother, whom she so much wished to
see, in a more eligible, more comfortable manner, than any other plan
could do, and perhaps without any greater delay. From Cleveland, which
was within a few miles of Bristol, the distance to Barton was not
beyond one day, though a long day's journey; and their mother's
servant might easily come there to attend them down; and as there
could be no occasion of their staying above a week at Cleveland, they
might now be at home in little more than three weeks' time. As
Marianne's affection for her mother was sincere, it must triumph with
little difficulty, over the imaginary evils she had started.

Mrs. Jennings was so far from being weary of her guest, that she
pressed them very earnestly to return with her again from Cleveland.
Elinor was grateful for the attention, but it could not alter her
design; and their mother's concurrence being readily gained, every
thing relative to their return was arranged as far as it could
be;--and Marianne found some relief in drawing up a statement of the
hours that were yet to divide her from Barton.

"Ah! Colonel, I do not know what you and I shall do without the Miss
Dashwoods;"--was Mrs. Jennings's address to him when he first called
on her, after their leaving her was settled--"for they are quite
resolved upon going home from the Palmers;--and how forlorn we shall
be, when I come back!--Lord! we shall sit and gape at one another as
dull as two cats."

Perhaps Mrs. Jennings was in hopes, by this vigorous sketch of their
future ennui, to provoke him to make that offer, which might give
himself an escape from it; and if so, she had soon afterwards good
reason to think her object gained; for, on Elinor's moving to the
window to take more expeditiously the dimensions of a print, which she
was going to copy for her friend, he followed her to it with a look of
particular meaning, and conversed with her there for several minutes.
The effect of his discourse on the lady too, could not escape her
observation, for though she was too honorable to listen, and had even
changed her seat, on purpose that she might _not_ hear, to one close
by the piano forte on which Marianne was playing, she could not keep
herself from seeing that Elinor changed colour, attended with
agitation, and was too intent on what he said to pursue her
employment. Still farther in confirmation of her hopes, in the
interval of Marianne's turning from one lesson to another, some words
of the Colonel's inevitably reached her ear, in which he seemed to be
apologising for the badness of his house. This set the matter beyond a
doubt. She wondered, indeed, at his thinking it necessary to do so;
but supposed it to be the proper etiquette. What Elinor said in reply
she could not distinguish, but judged from the motion of her lips,
that she did not think _that_ any material objection;--and Mrs.
Jennings commended her in her heart for being so honest. They then
talked on for a few minutes longer without her catching a syllable,
when another lucky stop in Marianne's performance brought her these
words in the Colonel's calm voice,--

"I am afraid it cannot take place very soon."

Astonished and shocked at so unlover-like a speech, she was almost
ready to cry out, "Lord! what should hinder it?"--but checking her
desire, confined herself to this silent ejaculation.

"This is very strange!--sure he need not wait to be older."

This delay on the Colonel's side, however, did not seem to offend or
mortify his fair companion in the least, for on their breaking up the
conference soon afterwards, and moving different ways, Mrs. Jennings
very plainly heard Elinor say, and with a voice which showed her to
feel what she said--

"I shall always think myself very much obliged to you."

Mrs. Jennings was delighted with her gratitude, and only wondered that
after hearing such a sentence, the Colonel should be able to take
leave of them, as he immediately did, with the utmost sang-froid, and
go away without making her any reply!--She had not thought her old
friend could have made so indifferent a suitor.

What had really passed between them was to this effect.

"I have heard," said he, with great compassion, "of the injustice your
friend Mr. Ferrars has suffered from his family; for if I understand
the matter right, he has been entirely cast off by them for
persevering in his engagement with a very deserving young woman. Have
I been rightly informed?--Is it so?--"

Elinor told him that it was.

"The cruelty, the impolitic cruelty,"--he replied, with great
feeling,--"of dividing, or attempting to divide, two young people
long attached to each other, is terrible. Mrs. Ferrars does not know
what she may be doing--what she may drive her son to. I have seen Mr.
Ferrars two or three times in Harley Street, and am much pleased with
him. He is not a young man with whom one can be intimately acquainted
in a short time, but I have seen enough of him to wish him well for
his own sake, and as a friend of yours, I wish it still more. I
understand that he intends to take orders. Will you be so good as to
tell him that the living of Delaford, now just vacant, as I am
informed by this day's post, is his, if he think it worth his
acceptance--but _that_, perhaps, so unfortunately circumstanced as he
is now, it may be nonsense to appear to doubt; I only wish it were
more valuable. It is a rectory, but a small one; the late incumbent, I
believe, did not make more than 200 L per annum, and though it is
certainly capable of improvement, I fear, not to such an amount as to
afford him a very comfortable income. Such as it is, however, my
pleasure in presenting him to it, will be very great. Pray assure him
of it."

Elinor's astonishment at this commission could hardly have been
greater, had the Colonel been really making her an offer of his hand.
The preferment, which only two days before she had considered as
hopeless for Edward, was already provided to enable him to marry;--and
_she_, of all people in the world, was fixed on to bestow it!--Her
emotion was such as Mrs. Jennings had attributed to a very different
cause;--but whatever minor feelings less pure, less pleasing, might
have a share in that emotion, her esteem for the general benevolence,
and her gratitude for the particular friendship, which together
prompted Colonel Brandon to this act, were strongly felt, and warmly
expressed. She thanked him for it with all her heart, spoke of
Edward's principles and disposition with that praise which she knew
them to deserve; and promised to undertake the commission with
pleasure, if it were really his wish to put off so agreeable an office
to another. But at the same time, she could not help thinking that no
one could so well perform it as himself. It was an office in short,
from which, unwilling to give Edward the pain of receiving an
obligation from _her_, she would have been very glad to be spared
herself; but Colonel Brandon, on motives of equal delicacy, declining
it likewise, still seemed so desirous of its being given through her
means, that she would not on any account make farther opposition.
Edward, she believed, was still in town, and fortunately she had heard
his address from Miss Steele. She could undertake therefore to inform
him of it, in the course of the day. After this had been settled,
Colonel Brandon began to talk of his own advantage in securing so
respectable and agreeable a neighbour, and _then_ it was that he
mentioned with regret, that the house was small and indifferent; an
evil which Elinor, as Mrs. Jennings had supposed her to do, made very
light of, at least as far as regarded its size.

"The smallness of the house," said she, "I cannot imagine any
inconvenience to them, for it will be in proportion to their family
and income."

By which the Colonel was surprised to find that _she_ was considering
Mr. Ferrars's marriage as the certain consequence of the presentation;
for he did not suppose it possible that Delaford living could supply
such an income, as anybody in his style of life would venture to
settle on, and he said so.

"This little rectory _can_ do no more than make Mr. Ferrars
comfortable as a bachelor; it cannot enable him to marry. I am sorry
to say that my patronage ends with this; and my interest is hardly
more extensive. If, however, by an unforeseen chance it should be in
my power to serve him farther, I must think very differently of him
from what I now do, if I am not as ready to be useful to him then as I
sincerely wish I could be at present. What I am now doing indeed,
seems nothing at all, since it can advance him so little towards what
must be his principal, his only object of happiness. His marriage must
still be a distant good;--at least, I am afraid it cannot take place
very soon."

Such was the sentence which, when misunderstood, so justly offended
the delicate feelings of Mrs. Jennings; but after this narration of
what really passed between Colonel Brandon and Elinor, while they
stood at the window, the gratitude expressed by the latter on their
parting, may perhaps appear in general, not less reasonably excited,
nor less properly worded than if it had arisen from an offer of
marriage.




CHAPTER XL


"Well, Miss Dashwood," said Mrs. Jennings, sagaciously smiling, as
soon as the gentleman had withdrawn, "I do not ask you what the
Colonel has been saying to you; for though, upon my honour, I _tried_
to keep out of hearing, I could not help catching enough to understand
his business. And I assure you I never was better pleased in my life,
and I wish you joy of it with all my heart."

"Thank you, ma'am," said Elinor. "It is a matter of great joy to me;
and I feel the goodness of Colonel Brandon most sensibly. There are
not many men who would act as he has done. Few people who have so
compassionate a heart! I never was more astonished in my life."

"Lord! my dear, you are very modest. I an't the least astonished at it
in the world, for I have often thought of late, there was nothing more
likely to happen."

"You judged from your knowledge of the Colonel's general benevolence;
but at least you could not foresee that the opportunity would so very
soon occur."

"Opportunity!" repeated Mrs. Jennings--"Oh! as to that, when a man has
once made up his mind to such a thing, somehow or other he will soon
find an opportunity. Well, my dear, I wish you joy of it again and
again; and if ever there was a happy couple in the world, I think I
shall soon know where to look for them."

"You mean to go to Delaford after them I suppose," said Elinor, with a
faint smile.

"Aye, my dear, that I do, indeed. And as to the house being a bad one,
I do not know what the Colonel would be at, for it is as good a one as
ever I saw."

"He spoke of its being out of repair."

"Well, and whose fault is that? why don't he repair it? who should do
it but himself?"

They were interrupted by the servant's coming in to announce the
carriage being at the door; and Mrs. Jennings immediately preparing to
go, said--

"Well, my dear, I must be gone before I have had half my talk out.
But, however, we may have it all over in the evening; for we shall be
quite alone. I do not ask you to go with me, for I dare say your mind
is too full of the matter to care for company; and besides, you must
long to tell your sister all about it."

Marianne had left the room before the conversation began.

"Certainly, ma'am, I shall tell Marianne of it; but I shall not
mention it at present to any body else."

"Oh! very well," said Mrs. Jennings rather disappointed. "Then you
would not have me tell it to Lucy, for I think of going as far as
Holborn to-day."

"No, ma'am, not even Lucy if you please. One day's delay will not be
very material; and till I have written to Mr. Ferrars, I think it
ought not to be mentioned to any body else. I shall do _that_
directly. It is of importance that no time should be lost with him,
for he will of course have much to do relative to his ordination."

This speech at first puzzled Mrs. Jennings exceedingly. Why Mr.
Ferrars was to have been written to about it in such a hurry, she
could not immediately comprehend. A few moments' reflection, however,
produced a very happy idea, and she exclaimed--

"Oh, ho! I understand you. Mr. Ferrars is to be the man. Well, so much
the better for him. Ay, to be sure, he must be ordained in readiness;
and I am very glad to find things are so forward between you. But, my
dear, is not this rather out of character? Should not the Colonel
write himself? Sure, he is the proper person."

Elinor did not quite understand the beginning of Mrs. Jennings's
speech, neither did she think it worth inquiring into; and therefore
only replied to its conclusion.

"Colonel Brandon is so delicate a man, that he rather wished any one
to announce his intentions to Mr. Ferrars than himself."

"And so _you_ are forced to do it. Well _that_ is an odd kind of
delicacy! However, I will not disturb you (seeing her preparing to
write.) You know your own concerns best. So good-bye, my dear. I have
not heard of any thing to please me so well since Charlotte was
brought to bed."

And away she went; but returning again in a moment--

"I have just been thinking of Betty's sister, my dear. I should be
very glad to get her so good a mistress. But whether she would do for
a lady's maid, I am sure I can't tell. She is an excellent housemaid,
and works very well at her needle. However, you will think of all that
at your leisure."

"Certainly, ma'am," replied Elinor, not hearing much of what she said,
and more anxious to be alone, than to be mistress of the subject.

How she should begin--how she should express herself in her note to
Edward, was now all her concern. The particular circumstances between
them made a difficulty of that which to any other person would have
been the easiest thing in the world; but she equally feared to say too
much or too little, and sat deliberating over her paper, with the pen
in her hand, till broken in on by the entrance of Edward himself.

He had met Mrs. Jennings at the door in her way to the carriage, as he
came to leave his farewell card; and she, after apologising for not
returning herself, had obliged him to enter, by saying that Miss
Dashwood was above, and wanted to speak with him on very particular
business.

Elinor had just been congratulating herself, in the midst of her
perplexity, that however difficult it might be to express herself
properly by letter, it was at least preferable to giving the
information by word of mouth, when her visitor entered, to force her
upon this greatest exertion of all. Her astonishment and confusion
were very great on his so sudden appearance. She had not seen him
before since his engagement became public, and therefore not since his
knowing her to be acquainted with it; which, with the consciousness of
what she had been thinking of, and what she had to tell him, made her
feel particularly uncomfortable for some minutes. He too was much
distressed; and they sat down together in a most promising state of
embarrassment. Whether he had asked her pardon for his intrusion on
first coming into the room, he could not recollect; but determining to
be on the safe side, he made his apology in form as soon as he could
say any thing, after taking a chair.

"Mrs. Jennings told me," said he, "that you wished to speak with me,
at least I understood her so--or I certainly should not have intruded
on you in such a manner; though at the same time, I should have been
extremely sorry to leave London without seeing you and your sister;
especially as it will most likely be some time--it is not probable
that I should soon have the pleasure of meeting you again. I go to
Oxford tomorrow."

"You would not have gone, however," said Elinor, recovering herself,
and determined to get over what she so much dreaded as soon as
possible, "without receiving our good wishes, even if we had not been
able to give them in person. Mrs. Jennings was quite right in what she
said. I have something of consequence to inform you of, which I was on
the point of communicating by paper. I am charged with a most
agreeable office (breathing rather faster than usual as she spoke.)
Colonel Brandon, who was here only ten minutes ago, has desired me to
say, that understanding you mean to take orders, he has great pleasure
in offering you the living of Delaford now just vacant, and only
wishes it were more valuable. Allow me to congratulate you on having
so respectable and well-judging a friend, and to join in his wish that
the living--it is about two hundred a-year--were much more
considerable, and such as might better enable you to--as might be more
than a temporary accommodation to yourself--such, in short, as might
establish all your views of happiness."

What Edward felt, as he could not say it himself, it cannot be
expected that any one else should say for him. He _looked_ all the
astonishment which such unexpected, such unthought-of information
could not fail of exciting; but he said only these two words--

"Colonel Brandon!"

"Yes," continued Elinor, gathering more resolution, as some of the
worst was over, "Colonel Brandon means it as a testimony of his
concern for what has lately passed--for the cruel situation in which
the unjustifiable conduct of your family has placed you--a concern
which I am sure Marianne, myself, and all your friends, must share;
and likewise as a proof of his high esteem for your general character,
and his particular approbation of your behaviour on the present
occasion."

"Colonel Brandon give _me_ a living!--Can it be possible?"

"The unkindness of your own relations has made you astonished to find
friendship any where."

"No," replied be, with sudden consciousness, "not to find it in _you_;
for I cannot be ignorant that to you, to your goodness, I owe it all.
I feel it--I would express it if I could--but, as you well know, I am
no orator."

"You are very much mistaken. I do assure you that you owe it entirely,
at least almost entirely, to your own merit, and Colonel Brandon's
discernment of it. I have had no hand in it. I did not even know, till
I understood his design, that the living was vacant; nor had it ever
occurred to me that he might have had such a living in his gift. As a
friend of mine, of my family, he may, perhaps--indeed I know he _has_,
still greater pleasure in bestowing it; but, upon my word, you owe
nothing to my solicitation."

Truth obliged her to acknowledge some small share in the action, but
she was at the same time so unwilling to appear as the benefactress of
Edward, that she acknowledged it with hesitation; which probably
contributed to fix that suspicion in his mind which had recently
entered it. For a short time he sat deep in thought, after Elinor had
ceased to speak;--at last, and as if it were rather an effort, he
said--

"Colonel Brandon seems a man of great worth and respectability. I have
always heard him spoken of as such, and your brother I know esteems
him highly. He is undoubtedly a sensible man, and in his manners
perfectly the gentleman."

"Indeed," replied Elinor, "I believe that you will find him, on
farther acquaintance, all that you have heard him to be, and as you
will be such very near neighbours (for I understand the parsonage is
almost close to the mansion-house,) it is particularly important that
he _should_ be all this."

Edward made no answer; but when she had turned away her head, gave her
a look so serious, so earnest, so uncheerful, as seemed to say, that
he might hereafter wish the distance between the parsonage and the
mansion-house much greater.

"Colonel Brandon, I think, lodges in St. James Street," said he, soon
afterwards, rising from his chair.

Elinor told him the number of the house.

"I must hurry away then, to give him those thanks which you will not
allow me to give _you_; to assure him that he has made me a very--an
exceedingly happy man."

Elinor did not offer to detain him; and they parted, with a very
earnest assurance on _her_ side of her unceasing good wishes for his
happiness in every change of situation that might befall him; on
_his_, with rather an attempt to return the same good will, than the
power of expressing it.

"When I see him again," said Elinor to herself, as the door shut him
out, "I shall see him the husband of Lucy."

And with this pleasing anticipation, she sat down to reconsider the
past, recall the words and endeavour to comprehend all the feelings of
Edward; and, of course, to reflect on her own with discontent.

When Mrs. Jennings came home, though she returned from seeing people
whom she had never seen before, and of whom therefore she must have a
great deal to say, her mind was so much more occupied by the important
secret in her possession, than by anything else, that she reverted to
it again as soon as Elinor appeared.

"Well, my dear," she cried, "I sent you up the young man. Did not I do
right?--And I suppose you had no great difficulty--You did not find
him very unwilling to accept your proposal?"

"No, ma'am; _that_ was not very likely."

"Well, and how soon will he be ready?--For it seems all to depend upon
that."

"Really," said Elinor, "I know so little of these kind of forms, that
I can hardly even conjecture as to the time, or the preparation
necessary; but I suppose two or three months will complete his
ordination."

"Two or three months!" cried Mrs. Jennings; "Lord! my dear, how calmly
you talk of it; and can the Colonel wait two or three months! Lord
bless me!--I am sure it would put _me_ quite out of patience!--And
though one would be very glad to do a kindness by poor Mr. Ferrars, I
do think it is not worth while to wait two or three months for him.
Sure somebody else might be found that would do as well; somebody that
is in orders already."

"My dear ma'am," said Elinor, "what can you be thinking of? Why,
Colonel Brandon's only object is to be of use to Mr. Ferrars."

"Lord bless you, my dear! Sure you do not mean to persuade me that the
Colonel only marries you for the sake of giving ten guineas to Mr.
Ferrars!"

[Illustration: _Both gained considerable amusement_]

The deception could not continue after this; and an explanation
immediately took place, by which both gained considerable amusement
for the moment, without any material loss of happiness to either, for
Mrs. Jennings only exchanged one form of delight for another, and
still without forfeiting her expectation of the first.

"Aye, aye, the parsonage is but a small one," said she, after the
first ebullition of surprise and satisfaction was over, "and very
likely _may_ be out of repair; but to hear a man apologising, as I
thought, for a house that to my knowledge has five sitting rooms on
the ground-floor, and I think the housekeeper told me could make up
fifteen beds! and to you too, that had been used to live in Barton
cottage! It seems quite ridiculous. But, my dear, we must touch up the
Colonel to do some thing to the parsonage, and make it comfortable for
them, before Lucy goes to it."

"But Colonel Brandon does not seem to have any idea of the living's
being enough to allow them to marry."

"The Colonel is a ninny, my dear; because he has two thousand a-year
himself, he thinks that nobody else can marry on less. Take my word
for it, that, if I am alive, I shall be paying a visit at Delaford
Parsonage before Michaelmas; and I am sure I shan't go if Lucy an't
there."

Elinor was quite of her opinion, as to the probability of their not
waiting for any thing more.




CHAPTER XLI


Edward, having carried his thanks to Colonel Brandon, proceeded with
his happiness to Lucy; and such was the excess of it by the time he
reached Bartlett's Buildings, that she was able to assure Mrs.
Jennings, who called on her again the next day with her
congratulations, that she had never seen him in such spirits before in
her life.

Her own happiness, and her own spirits, were at least very certain;
and she joined Mrs. Jennings most heartily in her expectation of their
being all comfortably together in Delaford Parsonage before
Michaelmas. So far was she, at the same time, from any backwardness to
give Elinor that credit which Edward _would_ give her, that she spoke
of her friendship for them both with the most grateful warmth, was
ready to own all their obligation to her, and openly declared that no
exertion for their good on Miss Dashwood's part, either present or
future, would ever surprise her, for she believed her capable of doing
any thing in the world for those she really valued. As for Colonel
Brandon, she was not only ready to worship him as a saint, but was
moreover truly anxious that he should be treated as one in all worldly
concerns; anxious that his tithes should be raised to the utmost; and
scarcely resolved to avail herself, at Delaford, as far as she
possibly could, of his servants, his carriage, his cows, and his
poultry.

It was now above a week since John Dashwood had called in Berkeley
Street, and as since that time no notice had been taken by them of his
wife's indisposition, beyond one verbal enquiry, Elinor began to feel
it necessary to pay her a visit. This was an obligation, however,
which not only opposed her own inclination, but which had not the
assistance of any encouragement from her companions. Marianne, not
contented with absolutely refusing to go herself, was very urgent to
prevent her sister's going at all; and Mrs. Jennings, though her
carriage was always at Elinor's service, so very much disliked Mrs.
John Dashwood, that not even her curiosity to see how she looked after
the late discovery, nor her strong desire to affront her by taking
Edward's part, could overcome her unwillingness to be in her company
again. The consequence was, that Elinor set out by herself to pay a
visit, for which no one could really have less inclination, and to run
the risk of a tête-à-tête with a woman, whom neither of the others had
so much reason to dislike.

Mrs. Dashwood was denied; but before the carriage could turn from the
house, her husband accidentally came out. He expressed great pleasure
in meeting Elinor, told her that he had been just going to call in
Berkeley Street, and, assuring her that Fanny would be very glad to
see her, invited her to come in.

They walked up stairs in to the drawing-room. Nobody was there.

"Fanny is in her own room, I suppose," said he:--"I will go to her
presently, for I am sure she will not have the least objection in the
world to seeing _you._ Very far from it, indeed. _Now_ especially
there cannot be--but however, you and Marianne were always great
favourites. Why would not Marianne come?"--

Elinor made what excuse she could for her.

"I am not sorry to see you alone," he replied, "for I have a good deal
to say to you. This living of Colonel Brandon's--can it be true?--has
he really given it to Edward?--I heard it yesterday by chance, and was
coming to you on purpose to enquire farther about it."

"It is perfectly true. Colonel Brandon has given the living of
Delaford to Edward."

"Really!--Well, this is very astonishing!--no relationship!--no
connection between them!--and now that livings fetch such a
price!--what was the value of this?"

"About two hundred a year."

"Very well--and for the next presentation to a living of that
value--supposing the late incumbent to have been old and sickly, and
likely to vacate it soon--he might have got I dare say--fourteen
hundred pounds. And how came he not to have settled that matter before
this person's death? _Now_ indeed it would be too late to sell it, but
a man of Colonel Brandon's sense!--I wonder he should be so
improvident in a point of such common, such natural, concern!--Well, I
am convinced that there is a vast deal of inconsistency in almost
every human character. I suppose, however--on recollection--that the
case may probably be _this._ Edward is only to hold the living till
the person to whom the Colonel has really sold the presentation, is
old enough to take it. Aye, aye, that is the fact, depend upon it."

Elinor contradicted it, however, very positively; and by relating that
she had herself been employed in conveying the offer from Colonel
Brandon to Edward, and, therefore, must understand the terms on which
it was given, obliged him to submit to her authority.

"It is truly astonishing!"--he cried, after hearing what she
said--"what could be the Colonel's motive?"

"A very simple one--to be of use to Mr. Ferrars."

"Well, well; whatever Colonel Brandon may be, Edward is a very lucky
man. You will not mention the matter to Fanny, however, for though I
have broke it to her, and she bears it vastly well,--she will not like
to hear it much talked of."

Elinor had some difficulty here to refrain from observing, that she
thought Fanny might have borne with composure, an acquisition of
wealth to her brother, by which neither she nor her child could be
possibly impoverished.

"Mrs. Ferrars," added he, lowering his voice to the tone becoming so
important a subject, "knows nothing about it at present, and I believe
it will be best to keep it entirely concealed from her as long as may
be. When the marriage takes place, I fear she must hear of it all."

"But why should such precaution be used? Though it is not to be
supposed that Mrs. Ferrars can have the smallest satisfaction in
knowing that her son has money enough to live upon,--for _that_ must
be quite out of the question; yet why, upon her late behaviour, is she
supposed to feel at all? She has done with her son, she cast him off
for ever, and has made all those over whom she had any influence, cast
him off likewise. Surely, after doing so, she cannot be imagined
liable to any impression of sorrow or of joy on his account--she
cannot be interested in any thing that befalls him. She would not be
so weak as to throw away the comfort of a child, and yet retain the
anxiety of a parent!"

"Ah! Elinor," said John, "your reasoning is very good, but it is
founded on ignorance of human nature. When Edward's unhappy match
takes place, depend upon it his mother will feel as much as if she had
never discarded him; and, therefore every circumstance that may
accelerate that dreadful event, must be concealed from her as much as
possible. Mrs. Ferrars can never forget that Edward is her son."

"You surprise me; I should think it must nearly have escaped her
memory by _this_ time."

"You wrong her exceedingly. Mrs. Ferrars is one of the most
affectionate mothers in the world."

Elinor was silent.

"We think _now_,"--said Mr. Dashwood, after a short pause, "of
_Robert's_ marrying Miss Morton."

Elinor, smiling at the grave and decisive importance of her brother's
tone, calmly replied--

"The lady, I suppose, has no choice in the affair."

"Choice!--how do you mean?"

"I only mean that I suppose, from your manner of speaking, it must be
the same to Miss Morton whether she marry Edward or Robert."

"Certainly, there can be no difference; for Robert will now to all
intents and purposes be considered as the eldest son;--and as to any
thing else, they are both very agreeable young men: I do not know that
one is superior to the other."

Elinor said no more, and John was also for a short time silent. His
reflections ended thus.

"Of _one_ thing, my dear sister," kindly taking her hand, and speaking
in an awful whisper,--"I may assure you; and I _will_ do it, because I
know it must gratify you. I have good reason to think--indeed I have
it from the best authority, or I should not repeat it, for otherwise
it would be very wrong to say any thing about it,--but I have it from
the very best authority,--not that I ever precisely heard Mrs. Ferrars
say it herself--but her daughter _did_, and I have it from her,--that
in short, whatever objections there might be against a certain--a
certain connection, you understand me,--it would have been far
preferable to her, it would not have given her half the vexation that
_this_ does. I was exceedingly pleased to hear that Mrs. Ferrars
considered it in that light; a very gratifying circumstance you know
to us all. 'It would have been beyond comparison,' she said, 'the
least evil of the two, and she would be glad to compound _now_ for
nothing worse.' But however, all that is quite out of the
question,--not to be thought of or mentioned. As to any attachment you
know, it never could be; all that is gone by. But I thought I would
just tell you of this, because I knew how much it must please you. Not
that you have any reason to regret, my dear Elinor. There is no doubt
of your doing exceedingly well,--quite as well, or better, perhaps,
all things considered. Has Colonel Brandon been with you lately?"

Elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify her vanity, and raise her
self-importance, to agitate her nerves and fill her mind;--and she was
therefore glad to be spared from the necessity of saying much in reply
herself, and from the danger of hearing any thing more from her
brother, by the entrance of Mr. Robert Ferrars. After a few moments'
chat, John Dashwood, recollecting that Fanny was yet uninformed of her
sister's being there, quitted the room in quest of her; and Elinor was
left to improve her acquaintance with Robert, who, by the gay
unconcern, the happy self-complacency of his manner while enjoying so
unfair a division of his mother's love and liberality, to the
prejudice of his banished brother, earned only by his own dissipated
course of life, and that brother's integrity, was confirming her most
unfavourable opinion of his head and heart.

[Illustration: "_Of one thing I may assure you._"]

They had scarcely been two minutes by themselves, before he began to
speak of Edward; for he, too, had heard of the living, and was very
inquisitive on the subject. Elinor repeated the particulars of it, as
she had given them to John; and their effect on Robert, though very
different, was not less striking than it had been on _him._ He laughed
most immoderately. The idea of Edward's being a clergyman, and living
in a small parsonage-house, diverted him beyond measure;--and when to
that was added the fanciful imagery of Edward reading prayers in a
white surplice, and publishing the banns of marriage between John
Smith and Mary Brown, he could conceive nothing more ridiculous.

Elinor, while she waited in silence and immovable gravity, the
conclusion of such folly, could not restrain her eyes from being fixed
on him with a look that spoke all the contempt it excited. It was a
look, however, very well bestowed, for it relieved her own feelings,
and gave no intelligence to him. He was recalled from wit to wisdom,
not by any reproof of her's, but by his own sensibility.

"We may treat it as a joke," said he, at last, recovering from the
affected laugh which had considerably lengthened out the genuine
gaiety of the moment; "but, upon my soul, it is a most serious
business. Poor Edward! he is ruined for ever. I am extremely sorry for
it; for I know him to be a very good-hearted creature,--as
well-meaning a fellow perhaps, as any in the world. You must not judge
of him, Miss Dashwood, from _your_ slight acquaintance. Poor Edward!
His manners are certainly not the happiest in nature. But we are not
all born, you know, with the same powers,--the same address. Poor
fellow! to see him in a circle of strangers! to be sure it was
pitiable enough; but upon my soul, I believe he has as good a heart as
any in the kingdom; and I declare and protest to you I never was so
shocked in my life, as when it all burst forth. I could not believe
it. My mother was the first person who told me of it; and I, feeling
myself called on to act with resolution, immediately said to her,--'My
dear madam, I do not know what you may intend to do on the occasion,
but as for myself, I must say, that if Edward does marry this young
woman, I never will see him again.' That was what I said immediately.
I was most uncommonly shocked, indeed! Poor Edward! he has done for
himself completely,--shut himself out for ever from all decent
society! but, as I directly said to my mother, I am not in the least
surprised at it; from his style of education, it was always to be
expected. My poor mother was half frantic."

"Have you ever seen the lady?"

"Yes; once, while she was staying in this house, I happened to drop in
for ten minutes; and I saw quite enough of her. The merest awkward
country girl, without style, or elegance, and almost without beauty. I
remember her perfectly. Just the kind of girl I should suppose likely
to captivate poor Edward. I offered immediately, as soon as my mother
related the affair to me, to talk to him myself, and dissuade him from
the match; but it was too late _then_, I found, to do any thing, for
unluckily, I was not in the way at first, and knew nothing of it till
after the breach had taken place, when it was not for me, you know, to
interfere. But had I been informed of it a few hours earlier, I think
it is most probable that something might have been hit on. I certainly
should have represented it to Edward in a very strong light. 'My dear
fellow,' I should have said, 'consider what you are doing. You are
making a most disgraceful connection, and such a one as your family
are unanimous in disapproving.' I cannot help thinking, in short, that
means might have been found. But now it is all too late. He must be
starved, you know, that is certain; absolutely starved."

He had just settled this point with great composure, when the entrance
of Mrs. John Dashwood put an end to the subject. But though _she_
never spoke of it out of her own family, Elinor could see its
influence on her mind, in the something like confusion of countenance
with which she entered, and an attempt at cordiality in her behaviour
to herself. She even proceeded so far as to be concerned to find that
Elinor and her sister were so soon to leave town, as she had hoped to
see more of them;--an exertion in which her husband, who attended her
into the room, and hung enamoured over her accents, seemed to
distinguish every thing that was most affectionate and graceful.




CHAPTER XLII


One other short call in Harley Street, in which Elinor received her
brother's congratulations on their travelling so far towards Barton
without any expense, and on Colonel Brandon's being to follow them to
Cleveland in a day or two, completed the intercourse of the brother
and sisters in town;--and a faint invitation from Fanny, to come to
Norland whenever it should happen to be in their way, which of all
things was the most unlikely to occur, with a more warm, though less
public, assurance, from John to Elinor, of the promptitude with which
he should come to see her at Delaford, was all that foretold any
meeting in the country.

It amused her to observe that all her friends seemed determined to
send her to Delaford;--a place, in which, of all others, she would now
least choose to visit, or wish to reside; for not only was it
considered as her future home by her brother and Mrs. Jennings, but
even Lucy, when they parted, gave her a pressing invitation to visit
her there.

Very early in April, and tolerably early in the day, the two parties
from Hanover Square and Berkeley Street set out from their respective
homes, to meet, by appointment, on the road. For the convenience of
Charlotte and her child, they were to be more than two days on their
journey, and Mr. Palmer, travelling more expeditiously with Colonel
Brandon, was to join them at Cleveland soon after their arrival.

Marianne, few as had been her hours of comfort in London, and eager as
she had long been to quit it, could not, when it came to the point,
bid adieu to the house in which she had for the last time enjoyed
those hopes, and that confidence, in Willoughby, which were now
extinguished for ever, without great pain. Nor could she leave the
place in which Willoughby remained, busy in new engagements, and new
schemes, in which _she_ could have no share, without shedding many
tears.

Elinor's satisfaction, at the moment of removal, was more positive.
She had no such object for her lingering thoughts to fix on, she left
no creature behind, from whom it would give her a moment's regret to
be divided for ever, she was pleased to be free herself from the
persecution of Lucy's friendship, she was grateful for bringing her
sister away unseen by Willoughby since his marriage, and she looked
forward with hope to what a few months of tranquility at Barton might
do towards restoring Marianne's peace of mind, and confirming her own.

Their journey was safely performed. The second day brought them into
the cherished, or the prohibited, county of Somerset, for as such was
it dwelt on by turns in Marianne's imagination; and in the forenoon of
the third they drove up to Cleveland.

Cleveland was a spacious, modern-built house, situated on a sloping
lawn. It had no park, but the pleasure-grounds were tolerably
extensive; and like every other place of the same degree of
importance, it had its open shrubbery, and closer wood walk, a road of
smooth gravel winding round a plantation, led to the front, the lawn
was dotted over with timber, the house itself was under the
guardianship of the fir, the mountain-ash, and the acacia, and a thick
screen of them altogether, interspersed with tall Lombardy poplars,
shut out the offices.

Marianne entered the house with a heart swelling with emotion from the
consciousness of being only eighty miles from Barton, and not thirty
from Combe Magna; and before she had been five minutes within its
walls, while the others were busily helping Charlotte to show her
child to the housekeeper, she quitted it again, stealing away through
the winding shrubberies, now just beginning to be in beauty, to gain a
distant eminence; where, from its Grecian temple, her eye, wandering
over a wide tract of country to the south-east, could fondly rest on
the farthest ridge of hills in the horizon, and fancy that from their
summits Combe Magna might be seen.

In such moments of precious, invaluable misery, she rejoiced in tears
of agony to be at Cleveland; and as she returned by a different
circuit to the house, feeling all the happy privilege of country
liberty, of wandering from place to place in free and luxurious
solitude, she resolved to spend almost every hour of every day while
she remained with the Palmers, in the indulgence of such solitary
rambles.

[Illustration: _Showing her child to the housekeeper._]

She returned just in time to join the others as they quitted the
house, on an excursion through its more immediate premises; and the
rest of the morning was easily whiled away, in lounging round the
kitchen garden, examining the bloom upon its walls, and listening to
the gardener's lamentations upon blights, in dawdling through the
green-house, where the loss of her favourite plants, unwarily exposed,
and nipped by the lingering frost, raised the laughter of
Charlotte,--and in visiting her poultry-yard, where, in the
disappointed hopes of her dairy-maid, by hens forsaking their nests,
or being stolen by a fox, or in the rapid decrease of a promising
young brood, she found fresh sources of merriment.

The morning was fine and dry, and Marianne, in her plan of employment
abroad, had not calculated for any change of weather during their stay
at Cleveland. With great surprise therefore, did she find herself
prevented by a settled rain from going out again after dinner. She had
depended on a twilight walk to the Grecian temple, and perhaps all
over the grounds, and an evening merely cold or damp would not have
deterred her from it; but a heavy and settled rain even _she_ could
not fancy dry or pleasant weather for walking.

Their party was small, and the hours passed quietly away. Mrs. Palmer
had her child, and Mrs. Jennings her carpet-work; they talked of the
friends they had left behind, arranged Lady Middleton's engagements,
and wondered whether Mr. Palmer and Colonel Brandon would get farther
than Reading that night. Elinor, however little concerned in it,
joined in their discourse; and Marianne, who had the knack of finding
her way in every house to the library, however it might be avoided by
the family in general, soon procured herself a book.

Nothing was wanting on Mrs. Palmer's side that constant and friendly
good humour could do, to make them feel themselves welcome. The
openness and heartiness of her manner more than atoned for that want
of recollection and elegance which made her often deficient in the
forms of politeness; her kindness, recommended by so pretty a face,
was engaging; her folly, though evident was not disgusting, because it
was not conceited; and Elinor could have forgiven every thing but her
laugh.

[Illustration: _The gardener's lamentations._]

The two gentlemen arrived the next day to a very late dinner,
affording a pleasant enlargement of the party, and a very welcome
variety to their conversation, which a long morning of the same
continued rain had reduced very low.

Elinor had seen so little of Mr. Palmer, and in that little had seen
so much variety in his address to her sister and herself, that she
knew not what to expect to find him in his own family. She found him,
however, perfectly the gentleman in his behaviour to all his visitors,
and only occasionally rude to his wife and her mother; she found him
very capable of being a pleasant companion, and only prevented from
being so always, by too great an aptitude to fancy himself as much
superior to people in general, as he must feel himself to be to Mrs.
Jennings and Charlotte. For the rest of his character and habits, they
were marked, as far as Elinor could perceive, with no traits at all
unusual in his sex and time of life. He was nice in his eating,
uncertain in his hours; fond of his child, though affecting to slight
it; and idled away the mornings at billiards, which ought to have been
devoted to business. She liked him, however, upon the whole, much
better than she had expected, and in her heart was not sorry that she
could like him no more; not sorry to be driven by the observation of
his epicurism, his selfishness, and his conceit, to rest with
complacency on the remembrance of Edward's generous temper, simple
taste, and diffident feelings.

Of Edward, or at least of some of his concerns, she now received
intelligence from Colonel Brandon, who had been into Dorsetshire
lately; and who, treating her at once as the disinterested friend of
Mr. Ferrars, and the kind of confidant of himself, talked to her a
great deal of the parsonage at Delaford, described its deficiencies,
and told her what he meant to do himself towards removing them. His
behaviour to her in this, as well as in every other particular, his
open pleasure in meeting her after an absence of only ten days, his
readiness to converse with her, and his deference for her opinion,
might very well justify Mrs. Jennings's persuasion of his attachment,
and would have been enough, perhaps, had not Elinor still, as from the
first, believed Marianne his real favourite, to make her suspect it
herself. But as it was, such a notion had scarcely ever entered her
head, except by Mrs. Jennings's suggestion; and she could not help
believing herself the nicest observer of the two: she watched his
eyes, while Mrs. Jennings thought only of his behaviour; and while his
looks of anxious solicitude on Marianne's feeling, in her head and
throat, the beginning of a heavy cold, because unexpressed by words,
entirely escaped the latter lady's observation,--_she_ could discover
in them the quick feelings, and needless alarm of a lover.

Two delightful twilight walks on the third and fourth evenings of her
being there, not merely on the dry gravel of the shrubbery, but all
over the grounds, and especially in the most distant parts of them,
where there was something more of wildness than in the rest, where the
trees were the oldest, and the grass was the longest and wettest,
had--assisted by the still greater imprudence of sitting in her wet
shoes and stockings--given Marianne a cold so violent as, though for a
day or two trifled with or denied, would force itself by increasing
ailments on the concern of every body, and the notice of herself.
Prescriptions poured in from all quarters, and as usual, were all
declined. Though heavy and feverish, with a pain in her limbs, and a
cough, and a sore throat, a good night's rest was to cure her
entirely; and it was with difficulty that Elinor prevailed on her,
when she went to bed, to try one or two of the simplest of the
remedies.




CHAPTER XLIII


Marianne got up the next morning at her usual time; to every inquiry
replied that she was better, and tried to prove herself so, by
engaging in her accustomary employments. But a day spent in sitting
shivering over the fire with a book in her hand, which she was unable
to read, or in lying, weary and languid, on a sofa, did not speak much
in favour of her amendment; and when, at last, she went early to bed,
more and more indisposed, Colonel Brandon was only astonished at her
sister's composure, who, though attending and nursing her the whole
day, against Marianne's inclination, and forcing proper medicines on
her at night, trusted, like Marianne, to the certainty and efficacy of
sleep, and felt no real alarm.

A very restless and feverish night, however, disappointed the
expectation of both; and when Marianne, after persisting in rising,
confessed herself unable to sit up, and returned voluntarily to her
bed, Elinor was very ready to adopt Mrs. Jennings's advice, of sending
for the Palmers' apothecary.

He came, examined his patient, and though encouraging Miss Dashwood to
expect that a very few days would restore her sister to health, yet,
by pronouncing her disorder to have a putrid tendency, and allowing
the word "infection" to pass his lips, gave instant alarm to Mrs.
Palmer, on her baby's account. Mrs. Jennings, who had been inclined
from the first to think Marianne's complaint more serious than Elinor,
now looked very grave on Mr. Harris's report, and confirming
Charlotte's fears and caution, urged the necessity of her immediate
removal with her infant; and Mr. Palmer, though treating their
apprehensions as idle, found the anxiety and importunity of his wife
too great to be withstood. Her departure, therefore, was fixed on; and
within an hour after Mr. Harris's arrival, she set off, with her
little boy and his nurse, for the house of a near relation of Mr.
Palmer's, who lived a few miles on the other side of Bath; whither her
husband promised, at her earnest entreaty, to join her in a day or
two; and whither she was almost equally urgent with her mother to
accompany her. Mrs. Jennings, however, with a kindness of heart which
made Elinor really love her, declared her resolution of not stirring
from Cleveland as long as Marianne remained ill, and of endeavouring,
by her own attentive care, to supply to her the place of the mother
she had taken her from; and Elinor found her on every occasion a most
willing and active helpmate, desirous to share in all her fatigues,
and often by her better experience in nursing, of material use.

Poor Marianne, languid and low from the nature of her malady, and
feeling herself universally ill, could no longer hope that tomorrow
would find her recovered; and the idea of what tomorrow would have
produced, but for this unlucky illness, made every ailment severe; for
on that day they were to have begun their journey home; and, attended
the whole way by a servant of Mrs. Jennings, were to have taken their
mother by surprise on the following forenoon. The little she said was
all in lamentation of this inevitable delay; though Elinor tried to
raise her spirits, and make her believe, as she _then_ really believed
herself, that it would be a very short one.

The next day produced little or no alteration in the state of the
patient; she certainly was not better, and, except that there was no
amendment, did not appear worse. Their party was now farther reduced;
for Mr. Palmer, though very unwilling to go as well from real humanity
and good-nature, as from a dislike of appearing to be frightened away
by his wife, was persuaded at last by Colonel Brandon to perform his
promise of following her; and while he was preparing to go, Colonel
Brandon himself, with a much greater exertion, began to talk of going
likewise. Here, however, the kindness of Mrs. Jennings interposed most
acceptably; for to send the Colonel away while his love was in so much
uneasiness on her sister's account, would be to deprive them both, she
thought, of every comfort; and therefore telling him at once that his
stay at Cleveland was necessary to herself, that she should want him
to play at piquet of an evening, while Miss Dashwood was above with
her sister, &c. she urged him so strongly to remain, that he, who was
gratifying the first wish of his own heart by a compliance, could not
long even affect to demur; especially as Mrs. Jennings's entreaty was
warmly seconded by Mr. Palmer, who seemed to feel a relief to himself,
in leaving behind him a person so well able to assist or advise Miss
Dashwood in any emergence.

Marianne was, of course, kept in ignorance of all these arrangements.
She knew not that she had been the means of sending the owners of
Cleveland away, in about seven days from the time of their arrival. It
gave her no surprise that she saw nothing of Mrs. Palmer; and as it
gave her likewise no concern, she never mentioned her name.

Two days passed away from the time of Mr. Palmer's departure, and her
situation continued, with little variation, the same. Mr. Harris, who
attended her every day, still talked boldly of a speedy recovery, and
Miss Dashwood was equally sanguine; but the expectation of the others
was by no means so cheerful. Mrs. Jennings had determined very early
in the seizure that Marianne would never get over it, and Colonel
Brandon, who was chiefly of use in listening to Mrs. Jennings's
forebodings, was not in a state of mind to resist their influence. He
tried to reason himself out of fears, which the different judgment of
the apothecary seemed to render absurd; but the many hours of each day
in which he was left entirely alone, were but too favourable for the
admission of every melancholy idea, and he could not expel from his
mind the persuasion that he should see Marianne no more.

On the morning of the third day however, the gloomy anticipations of
both were almost done away; for when Mr. Harris arrived, he declared
his patient materially better. Her pulse was much stronger, and every
symptom more favourable than on the preceding visit. Elinor, confirmed
in every pleasant hope, was all cheerfulness; rejoicing that in her
letters to her mother, she had pursued her own judgment rather than
her friend's, in making very light of the indisposition which delayed
them at Cleveland; and almost fixing on the time when Marianne would
be able to travel.

But the day did not close so auspiciously as it began. Towards the
evening Marianne became ill again, growing more heavy, restless, and
uncomfortable than before. Her sister, however, still sanguine, was
willing to attribute the change to nothing more than the fatigue of
having sat up to have her bed made; and carefully administering the
cordials prescribed, saw her, with satisfaction, sink at last into a
slumber, from which she expected the most beneficial effects. Her
sleep, though not so quiet as Elinor wished to see it, lasted a
considerable time; and anxious to observe the result of it herself,
she resolved to sit with her during the whole of it. Mrs. Jennings,
knowing nothing of any change in the patient, went unusually early to
bed; her maid, who was one of the principal nurses, was recreating
herself in the housekeeper's room, and Elinor remained alone with
Marianne.

The repose of the latter became more and more disturbed; and her
sister, who watched, with unremitting attention her continual change
of posture, and heard the frequent but inarticulate sounds of
complaint which passed her lips, was almost wishing to rouse her from
so painful a slumber, when Marianne, suddenly awakened by some
accidental noise in the house, started hastily up, and, with feverish
wildness, cried out,--

"Is mama coming?--"

"Not yet," cried the other, concealing her terror, and assisting
Marianne to lie down again, "but she will be here, I hope, before it
is long. It is a great way, you know, from hence to Barton."

"But she must not go round by London," cried Marianne, in the same
hurried manner. "I shall never see her, if she goes by London."

Elinor perceived with alarm that she was not quite herself, and, while
attempting to soothe her, eagerly felt her pulse. It was lower and
quicker than ever! and Marianne, still talking wildly of mama, her
alarm increased so rapidly, as to determine her on sending instantly
for Mr. Harris, and despatching a messenger to Barton for her mother.
To consult with Colonel Brandon on the best means of effecting the
latter, was a thought which immediately followed the resolution of its
performance; and as soon she had rung up the maid to take her place by
her sister, she hastened down to the drawing-room, where she knew he
was generally to be found at a much later hour than the present.

It was no time for hesitation. Her fears and her difficulties were
immediately before him. Her fears, he had no courage, no confidence to
attempt the removal of; he listened to them in silent despondence; but
her difficulties were instantly obviated, for with a readiness that
seemed to speak the occasion, and the service pre-arranged in his
mind, he offered himself as the messenger who should fetch Mrs.
Dashwood. Elinor made no resistance that was not easily overcome. She
thanked him with brief, though fervent gratitude, and while he went to
hurry off his servant with a message to Mr. Harris, and an order for
post-horses directly, she wrote a few lines to her mother.

The comfort of such a friend at that moment as Colonel Brandon--or
such a companion for her mother,--how gratefully was it felt!--a
companion whose judgment would guide, whose attendance must relieve,
and whose friendship might soothe her!--as far as the shock of such a
summons _could_ be lessened to her, his presence, his manners, his
assistance, would lessen it.

_He_, meanwhile, whatever he might feel, acted with all the firmness
of a collected mind, made every necessary arrangement with the utmost
despatch, and calculated with exactness the time in which she might
look for his return. Not a moment was lost in delay of any kind. The
horses arrived, even before they were expected, and Colonel Brandon
only pressing her hand with a look of solemnity, and a few words
spoken too low to reach her ear, hurried into the carriage. It was
then about twelve o'clock, and she returned to her sister's apartment
to wait for the arrival of the apothecary, and to watch by her the
rest of the night. It was a night of almost equal suffering to both.
Hour after hour passed away in sleepless pain and delirium on
Marianne's side, and in the most cruel anxiety on Elinor's, before Mr.
Harris appeared. Her apprehensions once raised, paid by their excess
for all her former security; and the servant who sat up with her, for
she would not allow Mrs. Jennings to be called, only tortured her
more, by hints of what her mistress had always thought.

Marianne's ideas were still, at intervals, fixed incoherently on her
mother, and whenever she mentioned her name, it gave a pang to the
heart of poor Elinor, who, reproaching herself for having trifled with
so many days of illness, and wretched for some immediate relief,
fancied that all relief might soon be in vain, that every thing had
been delayed too long, and pictured to herself her suffering mother
arriving too late to see this darling child, or to see her rational.

She was on the point of sending again for Mr. Harris, or if _he_ could
not come, for some other advice, when the former--but not till after
five o'clock--arrived. His opinion, however, made some little amends
for his delay, for though acknowledging a very unexpected and
unpleasant alteration in his patient, he would not allow the danger to
be material, and talked of the relief which a fresh mode of treatment
must procure, with a confidence which, in a lesser degree, was
communicated to Elinor. He promised to call again in the course of
three or four hours, and left both the patient and her anxious
attendant more composed than he had found them.

With strong concern, and with many reproaches for not being called to
their aid, did Mrs. Jennings hear in the morning of what had passed.
Her former apprehensions, now with greater reason restored, left her
no doubt of the event; and though trying to speak comfort to Elinor,
her conviction of her sister's danger would not allow her to offer the
comfort of hope. Her heart was really grieved. The rapid decay, the
early death of a girl so young, so lovely as Marianne, must have
struck a less interested person with concern. On Mrs. Jennings's
compassion she had other claims. She had been for three months her
companion, was still under her care, and she was known to have been
greatly injured, and long unhappy. The distress of her sister too,
particularly a favourite, was before her;--and as for their mother,
when Mrs. Jennings considered that Marianne might probably be to _her_
what Charlotte was to herself, her sympathy in _her_ sufferings was
very sincere.

Mr. Harris was punctual in his second visit; but he came to be
disappointed in his hopes of what the last would produce. His
medicines had failed; the fever was unabated; and Marianne only more
quiet--not more herself--remained in a heavy stupor. Elinor, catching
all, and more than all, his fears in a moment, proposed to call in
further advice. But he judged it unnecessary: he had still something
more to try, some more fresh application, of whose success he was as
confident as the last, and his visit concluded with encouraging
assurances which reached the ear, but could not enter the heart of
Miss Dashwood. She was calm, except when she thought of her mother;
but she was almost hopeless; and in this state she continued till
noon, scarcely stirring from her sister's bed, her thoughts wandering
from one image of grief, one suffering friend to another, and her
spirits oppressed to the utmost by the conversation of Mrs. Jennings,
who scrupled not to attribute the severity and danger of this attack
to the many weeks of previous indisposition which Marianne's
disappointment had brought on. Elinor felt all the reasonableness of
the idea, and it gave fresh misery to her reflections.

About noon, however, she began--but with a caution--a dread of
disappointment which for some time kept her silent, even to her
friend--to fancy, to hope she could perceive a slight amendment in her
sister's pulse; she waited, watched, and examined it again and again;
and at last, with an agitation more difficult to bury under exterior
calmness, than all her foregoing distress, ventured to communicate her
hopes. Mrs. Jennings, though forced, on examination, to acknowledge a
temporary revival, tried to keep her young friend from indulging a
thought of its continuance; and Elinor, conning over every injunction
of distrust, told herself likewise not to hope. But it was too late.
Hope had already entered; and feeling all its anxious flutter, she
bent over her sister to watch--she hardly knew for what. Half an hour
passed away, and the favourable symptom yet blessed her. Others even
arose to confirm it. Her breath, her skin, her lips, all flattered
Elinor with signs of amendment; and Marianne fixed her eyes on her
with a rational, though languid, gaze. Anxiety and hope now oppressed
her in equal degrees, and left her no moment of tranquillity till the
arrival of Mr. Harris at four o'clock; when his assurances, his
felicitations on a recovery in her sister even surpassing his
expectation, gave her confidence, comfort, and tears of joy.

Marianne was in every respect materially better, and he declared her
entirely out of danger. Mrs. Jennings, perhaps satisfied with the
partial justification of her forebodings which had been found in their
late alarm, allowed herself to trust in his judgment, and admitted,
with unfeigned joy, and soon with unequivocal cheerfulness, the
probability of an entire recovery.

Elinor could not be cheerful. Her joy was of a different kind, and led
to any thing rather than to gaiety. Marianne restored to life, health,
friends, and to her doting mother, was an idea to fill her heart with
sensations of exquisite comfort, and expand it in fervent
gratitude;--but it lead to no outward demonstrations of joy, no words,
no smiles. All within Elinor's breast was satisfaction, silent and
strong.

She continued by the side of her sister, with little intermission the
whole afternoon, calming every fear, satisfying every inquiry of her
enfeebled spirits, supplying every succour, and watching almost every
look and every breath. The possibility of a relapse would of course,
in some moments, occur to remind her of what anxiety was; but when she
saw, on her frequent and minute examination, that every symptom of
recovery continued, and saw Marianne at six o'clock sink into a quiet,
steady, and to all appearance comfortable, sleep, she silenced every
doubt.

The time was now drawing on, when Colonel Brandon might be expected
back. At ten o'clock, she trusted, or at least not much later her
mother would be relieved from the dreadful suspense in which she must
now be travelling towards them. The Colonel, too!--perhaps scarcely
less an object of pity! Oh! how slow was the progress of time which
yet kept them in ignorance!

At seven o'clock, leaving Marianne still sweetly asleep, she joined
Mrs. Jennings in the drawing-room to tea. Of breakfast she had been
kept by her fears, and of dinner by their sudden reverse, from eating
much; and the present refreshment, therefore, with such feelings of
content as she brought to it, was particularly welcome. Mrs. Jennings
would have persuaded her, at its conclusion, to take some rest before
her mother's arrival, and allow _her_ to take her place by Marianne;
but Elinor had no sense of fatigue, no capability of sleep at that
moment about her, and she was not to be kept away from her sister an
unnecessary instant. Mrs. Jennings therefore attending her up stairs
into the sick chamber, to satisfy herself that all continued right,
left her there again to her charge and her thoughts, and retired to
her own room to write letters and sleep.

The night was cold and stormy. The wind roared round the house, and
the rain beat against the windows; but Elinor, all happiness within,
regarded it not. Marianne slept through every blast; and the
travellers, they had a rich reward in store, for every present
inconvenience.

The clock struck eight. Had it been ten, Elinor would have been
convinced that at that moment she heard a carriage driving up to the
house; and so strong was the persuasion that she _did_, in spite of
the _almost_ impossibility of their being already come, that she moved
into the adjoining dressing-closet and opened a window shutter, to be
satisfied of the truth. She instantly saw that her ears had not
deceived her. The flaring lamps of a carriage were immediately in
view. By their uncertain light she thought she could discern it to be
drawn by four horses; and this, while it told the excess of her poor
mother's alarm, gave some explanation to such unexpected rapidity.

Never in her life had Elinor found it so difficult to be calm, as at
that moment. The knowledge of what her mother must be feeling as the
carriage stopped the door,--of her doubt--her dread,--perhaps her
despair!--and of what _she_ had to tell! with such knowledge it was
impossible to be calm. All that remained to be done was to be speedy;
and, therefore staying only till she could leave Mrs. Jennings's maid
with her sister, she hurried down stairs.

The bustle in the vestibule, as she passed along an inner lobby,
assured her that they were already in the house. She rushed to the
drawing-room,--she entered it,--and saw only Willoughby.

[Illustration: _Opened a window-shutter._]




CHAPTER XLIV


Elinor, starting back with a look of horror at the sight of him,
obeyed the first impulse of her heart in turning instantly to quit the
room, and her hand was already on the lock, when its action was
suspended by his hastily advancing, and saying, in a voice rather of
command than supplication--

"Miss Dashwood, for half an hour--for ten minutes--I entreat you to
stay."

"No, sir," she replied with firmness, "I shall _not_ stay. Your
business cannot be with _me._ The servants, I suppose, forgot to tell
you that Mr. Palmer was not in the house."

"Had they told me," he cried with vehemence, "that Mr. Palmer and all
his relations were at the devil, it would not have turned me from the
door. My business is with you, and only you."

"With me!"--in the utmost amazement;--"well, sir--be quick--and if you
can--less violent."

"Sit down, and I will be both."

She hesitated; she knew not what to do. The possibility of Colonel
Brandon's arriving and finding her there, came across her. But she had
promised to hear him, and her curiosity no less than her honor was
engaged. After a moment's recollection, therefore, concluding that
prudence required dispatch, and that her acquiescence would best
promote it, she walked silently towards the table, and sat down. He
took the opposite chair, and for half a minute not a word was said by
either.

"Pray be quick, sir," said Elinor, impatiently; "I have no time to
spare."

He was sitting in an attitude of deep meditation, and seemed not to
hear her.

"Your sister," said he, with abruptness, a moment afterwards--"is out
of danger. I heard it from the servant. God be praised!--But is it
true? is it really true?"

Elinor would not speak. He repeated the inquiry with yet greater
eagerness.

"For God's sake tell me, is she out of danger, or is she not?"

[Illustration: "_I entreat you to stay._"]

"We hope she is."

He rose up, and walked across the room.

"Had I known as much half an hour ago--But since I _am_
here,"--speaking with a forced vivacity as he returned to his
seat,--"what does it signify?--For once, Miss Dashwood--it will be the
last time, perhaps--let us be cheerful together. I am in a fine mood
for gaiety. Tell me honestly,"--a deeper glow overspreading his
cheeks, "do you think me most a knave or a fool?"

Elinor looked at him with greater astonishment than ever. She began to
think that he must be in liquor;--the strangeness of such a visit, and
of such manners, seemed no otherwise intelligible; and with this
impression she immediately rose, saying--

"Mr. Willoughby, I advise you at present to return to Combe--I am not
at leisure to remain with you longer. Whatever your business may be
with me, will it be better recollected and explained to-morrow."

"I understand you," he replied, with an expressive smile, and a voice
perfectly calm; "yes, I am very drunk. A pint of porter with my cold
beef at Marlborough was enough to over-set me."

"At Marlborough!"--cried Elinor, more and more at a loss to understand
what he would be at.

"Yes,--I left London this morning at eight o'clock, and the only ten
minutes I have spent out of my chaise since that time procured me a
nuncheon at Marlborough."

The steadiness of his manner, and the intelligence of his eye as he
spoke, convincing Elinor, that whatever other unpardonable folly might
bring him to Cleveland, he was not brought there by intoxication, she
said, after a moment's recollection--

"Mr. Willoughby, you _ought_ to feel, and I certainly _do_, that after
what has passed--your coming here in this manner, and forcing yourself
upon my notice, requires a very particular excuse. What is it, that
you mean by it?"--

"I mean,"--said he, with serious energy--"if I can, to make you hate
me one degree less than you do _now._ I mean to offer some kind of
explanation, some kind of apology, for the past; to open my whole
heart to you, and by convincing you, that though I have been always a
blockhead, I have not been always a rascal, to obtain something like
forgiveness from Ma----, from your sister."

"Is this the real reason of your coming?"

"Upon my soul it is," was his answer, with a warmth which brought all
the former Willoughby to her remembrance, and in spite of herself made
her think him sincere.

"If that is all, you may be satisfied already; for Marianne _does_,
she has _long_ forgiven you."

"Has she?" he cried, in the same eager tone. "Then she has forgiven me
before she ought to have done it. But she shall forgive me again, and
on more reasonable grounds. _Now_ will you listen to me?"

Elinor bowed her assent.

"I do not know," said he, after a pause of expectation on her side,
and thoughtfulness on his own, "how _you_ may have accounted for my
behaviour to your sister, or what diabolical motive you may have
imputed to me. Perhaps you will hardly think the better of me,--it is
worth the trial however, and you shall hear every thing. When I first
became intimate in your family, I had no other intention, no other
view in the acquaintance than to pass my time pleasantly while I was
obliged to remain in Devonshire, more pleasantly than I had ever done
before. Your sister's lovely person and interesting manners could not
but please me; and her behaviour to me almost from the first, was of a
kind--It is astonishing, when I reflect on what it was, and what _she_
was, that my heart should have been so insensible! But at first I must
confess, my vanity only was elevated by it. Careless of her happiness,
thinking only of my own amusement, giving way to feelings which I had
always been too much in the habit of indulging, I endeavoured, by
every means in my power, to make myself pleasing to her, without any
design of returning her affection."

Miss Dashwood, at this point, turning her eyes on him with the most
angry contempt, stopped him, by saying--

"It is hardly worth while, Mr. Willoughby, for you to relate, or for
me to listen any longer. Such a beginning as this cannot be followed
by any thing. Do not let me be pained by hearing any thing more on the
subject."

"I insist on you hearing the whole of it," he replied, "My fortune was
never large, and I had always been expensive, always in the habit of
associating with people of better income than myself. Every year
since my coming of age, or even before, I believe, had added to my
debts; and though the death of my old cousin, Mrs. Smith, was to set
me free; yet that event being uncertain, and possibly far distant, it
had been for some time my intention to re-establish my circumstances
by marrying a woman of fortune. To attach myself to your sister,
therefore, was not a thing to be thought of; and with a meanness,
selfishness, cruelty, which no indignant, no contemptuous look, even
of yours, Miss Dashwood, can ever reprobate too much,--I was acting in
this manner, trying to engage her regard, without a thought of
returning it. But one thing may be said for me: even in that horrid
state of selfish vanity, I did not know the extent of the injury I
meditated, because I did not _then_ know what it was to love. But have
I ever known it? Well may it be doubted; for, had I really loved,
could I have sacrificed my feelings to vanity, to avarice? or, what is
more, could I have sacrificed hers? But I have done it. To avoid a
comparative poverty, which her affection and her society would have
deprived of all its horrors, I have, by raising myself to affluence,
lost every thing that could make it a blessing."

"You did then," said Elinor, a little softened, "believe yourself at
one time attached to her?"

"To have resisted such attractions, to have withstood such tenderness!
Is there a man on earth who could have done it? Yes, I found myself,
by insensible degrees, sincerely fond of her; and the happiest hours
of my life were what I spent with her when I felt my intentions were
strictly honourable, and my feelings blameless. Even _then_, however,
when fully determined on paying my addresses to her, I allowed myself
most improperly to put off, from day to day, the moment of doing it,
from an unwillingness to enter into an engagement while my
circumstances were so greatly embarrassed. I will not reason here--nor
will I stop for _you_ to expatiate on the absurdity, and the worse
than absurdity, of scrupling to engage my faith where my honour was
already bound. The event has proved, that I was a cunning fool,
providing with great circumspection for a possible opportunity of
making myself contemptible and wretched for ever. At last, however, my
resolution was taken, and I had determined, as soon as I could engage
her alone, to justify the attentions I had so invariably paid her, and
openly assure her of an affection which I had already taken such pains
to display. But in the interim--in the interim of the very few hours
that were to pass, before I could have an opportunity of speaking with
her in private--a circumstance occurred--an unlucky circumstance--to
ruin all my resolution, and with it all my comfort. A discovery took
place,"--here he hesitated and looked down. "Mrs. Smith had somehow or
other been informed, I imagine by some distant relation, whose
interest it was to deprive me of her favour, of an affair, a
connection--but I need not explain myself farther," he added, looking
at her with an heightened colour and an enquiring eye,--"your
particular intimacy--you have probably heard the whole story long
ago."

"I have," returned Elinor, colouring likewise, and hardening her heart
anew against any compassion for him, "I have heard it all. And how you
will explain away any part of your guilt in that dreadful business, I
confess is beyond my comprehension."

"Remember," cried Willoughby, "from whom you received the account.
Could it be an impartial one? I acknowledge that her situation and her
character ought to have been respected by me. I do not mean to justify
myself, but at the same time cannot leave you to suppose that I have
nothing to urge--that because she was injured she was irreproachable,
and because _I_ was a libertine, _she_ must be a saint. If the
violence of her passions, the weakness of her understanding--I do not
mean, however, to defend myself. Her affection for me deserved better
treatment, and I often, with great self-reproach, recall the
tenderness which, for a very short time, had the power of creating any
return. I wish--I heartily wish it had never been. But I have injured
more than herself; and I have injured one, whose affection for
me--(may I say it?) was scarcely less warm than hers; and whose
mind--Oh! how infinitely superior!"

"Your indifference, however, towards that unfortunate girl--I must say
it, unpleasant to me as the discussion of such a subject may well
be--your indifference is no apology for your cruel neglect of her. Do
not think yourself excused by any weakness, any natural defect of
understanding on her side, in the wanton cruelty so evident on yours.
You must have known, that while you were enjoying yourself in
Devonshire pursuing fresh schemes, always gay, always happy, she was
reduced to the extremest indigence."

"But, upon my soul, I did _not_ know it," he warmly replied; "I did
not recollect that I had omitted to give her my direction; and common
sense might have told her how to find it out."

"Well, sir, and what said Mrs. Smith?"

"She taxed me with the offence at once, and my confusion may be
guessed. The purity of her life, the formality of her notions, her
ignorance of the world,--every thing was against me. The matter itself
I could not deny, and vain was every endeavour to soften it. She was
previously disposed, I believe, to doubt the morality of my conduct in
general, and was moreover discontented with the very little attention,
the very little portion of my time that I had bestowed on her, in my
present visit. In short, it ended in a total breach. By one measure I
might have saved myself. In the height of her morality, good woman!
she offered to forgive the past, if I would marry Eliza. That could
not be; and I was formally dismissed from her favour and her house.
The night following this affair--I was to go the next morning--was
spent by me in deliberating on what my future conduct should be. The
struggle was great, but it ended too soon. My affection for Marianne,
my thorough conviction of her attachment to me--it was all
insufficient to outweigh that dread of poverty, or get the better of
those false ideas of the necessity of riches, which I was naturally
inclined to feel, and expensive society had increased. I had reason to
believe myself secure of my present wife, if I chose to address her,
and I persuaded myself to think that nothing else in common prudence
remained for me to do. A heavy scene however awaited me, before I
could leave Devonshire: I was engaged to dine with you on that very
day; some apology was therefore necessary for my breaking this
engagement. But whether I should write this apology, or deliver it in
person, was a point of long debate. To see Marianne, I felt, would be
dreadful, and I even doubted whether I could see her again, and keep
to my resolution. In that point, however, I undervalued my own
magnanimity, as the event declared; for I went, I saw her, and saw her
miserable, and left her miserable;--and left her hoping never to see
her again."

"Why did you call, Mr. Willoughby?" said Elinor, reproachfully; "a
note would have answered every purpose. Why was it necessary to
call?"

[Illustration: "_I was formally dismissed._"]

"It was necessary to my own pride. I could not bear to leave the
country in a manner that might lead you, or the rest of the
neighbourhood, to suspect any part of what had really passed between
Mrs. Smith and myself, and I resolved therefore on calling at the
cottage, in my way to Honiton. The sight of your dear sister, however,
was really dreadful; and, to heighten the matter, I found her alone.
You were all gone I do not know where. I had left her only the evening
before, so fully, so firmly resolved within my self on doing right! A
few hours were to have engaged her to me for ever; and I remember how
happy, how gay were my spirits, as I walked from the cottage to
Allenham, satisfied with myself, delighted with every body! But in
this, our last interview of friendship, I approached her with a sense
of guilt that almost took from me the power of dissembling. Her
sorrow, her disappointment, her deep regret, when I told her that I
was obliged to leave Devonshire so immediately--I never shall forget
it--united too with such reliance, such confidence in me! Oh, God!
what a hard-hearted rascal I was!"

They were both silent for a few moments. Elinor first spoke.

"Did you tell her that you should soon return?"

"I do not know what I told her," he replied, impatiently; "less than
was due to the past, beyond a doubt, and in all likelihood much more
than was justified by the future. I cannot think of it. It won't do.
Then came your dear mother to torture me farther, with all her
kindness and confidence. Thank Heaven! it _did_ torture me. I was
miserable. Miss Dashwood, you cannot have an idea of the comfort it
gives me to look back on my own misery. I owe such a grudge to myself
for the stupid, rascally folly of my own heart, that all my past
sufferings under it are only triumph and exultation to me now. Well, I
went, left all that I loved, and went to those to whom, at best, I was
only indifferent. My journey to town--travelling with my own horses,
and therefore so tediously--no creature to speak to--my own
reflections so cheerful--when I looked forward every thing so
inviting!--when I looked back at Barton, the picture so soothing!--oh,
it was a blessed journey!"

He stopped.

"Well, sir," said Elinor, who, though pitying him, grew impatient for
his departure, "and this is all?"

"Ah!--no,--have you forgot what passed in town? That infamous letter?
Did she show it you?"

"Yes, I saw every note that passed."

"When the first of hers reached me (as it immediately did, for I was
in town the whole time,) what I felt is, in the common phrase, not to
be expressed; in a more simple one--perhaps too simple to raise any
emotion, my feelings were very, very painful. Every line, every word
was--in the hackneyed metaphor which their dear writer, were she here,
would forbid--a dagger to my heart. To know that Marianne was in town
was, in the same language, a thunderbolt. Thunderbolts and daggers!
what a reproof would she have given me! her taste, her opinions--I
believe they are better known to me than my own, and I am sure they
are dearer."

Elinor's heart, which had undergone many changes in the course of this
extraordinary conversation, was now softened again;--yet she felt it
her duty to check such ideas in her companion as the last.

"This is not right, Mr. Willoughby. Remember that you are married.
Relate only what in your conscience you think necessary for me to
hear."

"Marianne's note, by assuring me that I was still as dear to her as in
former days, that in spite of the many, many weeks we had been
separated, she was as constant in her own feelings, and as full of
faith in the constancy of mine as ever, awakened all my remorse. I say
awakened, because time and London, business and dissipation, had in
some measure quieted it, and I had been growing a fine hardened
villain, fancying myself indifferent to her, and choosing to fancy
that she too must have become indifferent to me; talking to myself of
our past attachment as a mere idle, trifling business, shrugging up my
shoulders in proof of its being so, and silencing every reproach,
overcoming every scruple, by secretly saying now and then, 'I shall be
heartily glad to hear she is well married.' But this note made me know
myself better. I felt that she was infinitely dearer to me than any
other woman in the world, and that I was using her infamously. But
every thing was then just settled between Miss Grey and me. To retreat
was impossible. All that I had to do, was to avoid you both. I sent no
answer to Marianne, intending by that to preserve myself from her
farther notice; and for some time I was even determined not to call
in Berkeley Street; but at last, judging it wiser to affect the air of
a cool, common acquaintance than anything else, I watched you all
safely out of the house one morning, and left my name."

"Watched us out of the house!"

"Even so. You would be surprised to hear how often I watched you, how
often I was on the point of falling in with you. I have entered many a
shop to avoid your sight, as the carriage drove by. Lodging as I did
in Bond Street, there was hardly a day in which I did not catch a
glimpse of one or other of you; and nothing but the most constant
watchfulness on my side, a most invariably prevailing desire to keep
out of your sight, could have separated us so long. I avoided the
Middletons as much as possible, as well as everybody else who was
likely to prove an acquaintance in common. Not aware of their being in
town, however, I blundered on Sir John, I believe, the first day of
his coming, and the day after I had called at Mrs. Jennings's. He
asked me to a party, a dance at his house in the evening. Had he _not_
told me as an inducement that you and your sister were to be there, I
should have felt it too certain a thing, to trust myself near him. The
next morning brought another short note from Marianne--still
affectionate, open, artless, confiding--everything that could make
_my_ conduct most hateful. I could not answer it. I tried--but could
not frame a sentence. But I thought of her, I believe, every moment of
the day. If you _can_ pity me, Miss Dashwood, pity my situation as it
was _then._ With my head and heart full of your sister, I was forced
to play the happy lover to another woman! Those three or four weeks
were worse than all. Well, at last, as I need not tell you, you were
forced on me; and what a sweet figure I cut! what an evening of agony
it was! Marianne, beautiful as an angel on one side, calling me
Willoughby in such a tone! Oh, God! holding out her hand to me, asking
me for an explanation, with those bewitching eyes fixed in such
speaking solicitude on my face! and Sophia, jealous as the devil on
the other hand, looking all that was--Well, it does not signify; it is
over now. Such an evening! I ran away from you all as soon as I could;
but not before I had seen Marianne's sweet face as white as death.
_That_ was the last, last look I ever had of her; the last manner in
which she appeared to me. It was a horrid sight! yet when I thought
of her to-day as really dying, it was a kind of comfort to me to
imagine that I knew exactly how she would appear to those, who saw her
last in this world. She was before me, constantly before me, as I
travelled, in the same look and hue."

[Illustration: "_I have entered many a shop to avoid your sight._"]

A short pause of mutual thoughtfulness succeeded. Willoughby first
rousing himself, broke it thus:

"Well, let me make haste and be gone. Your sister is certainly better,
certainly out of danger?"

"We are assured of it."

"Your poor mother, too!--doting on Marianne."

"But the letter, Mr. Willoughby, your own letter; have you any thing
to say about that?"

"Yes, yes, _that_ in particular. Your sister wrote to me again, you
know, the very next morning. You saw what she said. I was breakfasting
at the Ellisons,--and her letter, with some others, was brought to me
there from my lodgings. It happened to catch Sophia's eye before it
caught mine;--and its size, the elegance of the paper, the hand-writing
altogether, immediately gave her a suspicion. Some vague report had
reached her before of my attachment to some young lady in Devonshire,
and what had passed within her observation the preceding evening had
marked who the young lady was, and made her more jealous than ever.
Affecting that air of playfulness, therefore, which is delightful in a
woman one loves, she opened the letter directly, and read its contents.
She was well paid for her impudence. She read what made her wretched.
Her wretchedness I could have borne, but her passion--her malice--at all
events it must be appeased. And, in short, what do you think of my
wife's style of letter-writing?--delicate--tender--truly feminine--was
it not?"

"Your wife! The letter was in your own hand-writing."

"Yes, but I had only the credit of servilely copying such sentences as
I was ashamed to put my name to. The original was all her own--her own
happy thoughts and gentle diction. But what could I do! we were
engaged, every thing in preparation, the day almost fixed--but I am
talking like a fool. Preparation! Day! In honest words, her money was
necessary to me, and in a situation like mine, any thing was to be
done to prevent a rupture. And after all, what did it signify to my
character in the opinion of Marianne and her friends, in what
language my answer was couched? It must have been only to one end. My
business was to declare myself a scoundrel, and whether I did it with
a bow or a bluster was of little importance. 'I am ruined for ever in
their opinion,' said I to myself; 'I am shut out for ever from their
society, they already think me an unprincipled fellow, this letter
will only make them think me a blackguard one.' Such were my
reasonings, as, in a sort of desperate carelessness, I copied my
wife's words, and parted with the last relics of Marianne. Her three
notes--unluckily they were all in my pocket-book, or I should have
denied their existence, and hoarded them for ever--I was forced to put
them up, and could not even kiss them. And the lock of hair--that too
I had always carried about me in the same pocket-book, which was now
searched by Madam with the most ingratiating virulence,--the dear
lock--all, every memento was torn from me."

"You are very wrong, Mr. Willoughby, very blamable," said Elinor,
while her voice, in spite of herself, betrayed her compassionate
emotion; "you ought not to speak in this way, either of Mrs.
Willoughby or my sister. You had made your own choice. It was not
forced on you. Your wife has a claim to your politeness, to your
respect, at least. She must be attached to you, or she would not have
married you. To treat her with unkindness, to speak of her slightingly
is no atonement to Marianne--nor can I suppose it a relief to your own
conscience."

"Do not talk to me of my wife," said he with a heavy sigh. "She does
not deserve your compassion. She knew I had no regard for her when we
married. Well, married we were, and came down to Combe Magna to be
happy, and afterwards returned to town to be gay. And now do you pity
me, Miss Dashwood? or have I said all this to no purpose? Am I,--be
it only one degree,--am I less guilty in your opinion than I was
before? My intentions were not always wrong. Have I explained away any
part of my guilt?"

"Yes, you have certainly removed something--a little. You have proved
yourself, on the whole, less faulty than I had believed you. You have
proved your heart less wicked, much less wicked. But I hardly
know--the misery that you have inflicted--I hardly know what could
have made it worse."

"Will you repeat to your sister when she is recovered, what I have
been telling you?--Let me be a little lightened too in her opinion as
well as in yours. You tell me that she has forgiven me already. Let me
be able to fancy that a better knowledge of my heart, and of my
present feelings, will draw from her a more spontaneous, more natural,
more gentle, less dignified, forgiveness. Tell her of my misery and my
penitence--tell her that my heart was never inconstant to her, and if
you will, that at this moment she is dearer to me than ever."

"I will tell her all that is necessary to what may comparatively be
called, your justification. But you have not explained to me the
particular reason of your coming now, nor how you heard of her
illness."

"Last night, in Drury Lane lobby, I ran against Sir John Middleton,
and when he saw who I was, for the first time these two months--he
spoke to me. That he had cut me ever since my marriage, I had seen
without surprise or resentment. Now, however, his good-natured,
honest, stupid soul, full of indignation against me, and concern for
your sister, could not resist the temptation of telling me what he
knew ought to, though probably he did not think it _would_, vex me
horridly. As bluntly as he could speak it, therefore, he told me that
Marianne Dashwood was dying of a putrid fever at Cleveland--a letter
that morning received from Mrs. Jennings declared her danger most
imminent--the Palmers are all gone off in a fright, &c. I was too much
shocked to be able to pass myself off as insensible even to the
undiscerning Sir John. His heart was softened in seeing mine suffer;
and so much of his ill-will was done away, that when we parted, he
almost shook me by the hand while he reminded me of an old promise
about a pointer puppy. What I felt on hearing that your sister was
dying, and dying too, believing me the greatest villain upon earth,
scorning, hating me in her latest moments--for how could I tell what
horrid projects might not have been imputed? _One_ person I was sure
would represent me as capable of any thing. What I felt was dreadful!
My resolution was soon made, and at eight o'clock this morning I was
in my carriage. Now you know all."

Elinor made no answer. Her thoughts were silently fixed on the
irreparable injury which too early an independence and its consequent
habits of idleness, dissipation, and luxury, had made in the mind, the
character, the happiness, of a man who, to every advantage of person
and talents, united a disposition naturally open and honest, and a
feeling, affectionate temper. The world had made him extravagant and
vain--Extravagance and vanity had made him cold-hearted and selfish.
Vanity, while seeking its own guilty triumph at the expense of
another, had involved him in a real attachment, which extravagance, or
at least its offspring, necessity, had required to be sacrificed. Each
faulty propensity in leading him to evil, had led him likewise to
punishment. The attachment, from which against honour, against
feeling, against every better interest he had outwardly torn himself,
now, when no longer allowable, governed every thought; and the
connection, for the sake of which he had, with little scruple, left
her sister to misery, was likely to prove a source of unhappiness to
himself of a far more incurable nature. From a reverie of this kind
she was recalled at the end of some minutes by Willoughby, who,
rousing himself from a reverie at least equally painful, started up in
preparation for going, and said--

"There is no use in staying here; I must be off."

"Are you going back to town?"

"No--to Combe Magna. I have business there; from thence to town in a
day or two. Good bye."

He held out his hand. She could not refuse to give him hers;--he
pressed it with affection.

"And you _do_ think something better of me than you did?"--said he,
letting it fall, and leaning against the mantelpiece as if forgetting
he was to go.

Elinor assured him that she did;--that she forgave, pitied, wished him
well--was even interested in his happiness--and added some gentle
counsel as to the behaviour most likely to promote it. His answer was
not very encouraging.

"As to that," said he, "I must rub through the world as well as I can.
Domestic happiness is out of the question. If, however, I am allowed
to think that you and yours feel an interest in my fate and actions,
it may be the means--it may put me on my guard--at least, it may be
something to live for. Marianne to be sure is lost to me for ever.
Were I even by any blessed chance at liberty again--"

Elinor stopped him with a reproof.

"Well,"--he replied--"once more good bye. I shall now go away and live
in dread of one event."

"What do you mean?"

"Your sister's marriage."

"You are very wrong. She can never be more lost to you than she is
now."

"But she will be gained by some one else. And if that some one should
be the very he whom, of all others, I could least bear--but I will not
stay to rob myself of all your compassionate good-will, by showing that
where I have most injured I can least forgive. Good bye,--God bless
you!"

And with these words, he almost ran out of the room.




CHAPTER XLV


Elinor, for some time after he left her, for some time even after the
sound of his carriage had died away, remained too much oppressed by a
crowd of ideas, widely differing in themselves, but of which sadness
was the general result, to think even of her sister.

Willoughby, he, whom only half an hour ago she had abhorred as the
most worthless of men, Willoughby, in spite of all his faults, excited
a degree of commiseration for the sufferings produced by them, which
made her think of him as now separated for ever from her family, with
a tenderness, a regret, rather in proportion, as she soon acknowledged
within herself--to his wishes than to his merits. She felt that his
influence over her mind was heightened by circumstances which ought
not in reason to have weight; by that person of uncommon attraction,
that open, affectionate, and lively manner which it was no merit to
possess; and by that still ardent love for Marianne, which it was not
even innocent to indulge. But she felt that it was so, long, long
before she could feel his influence less.

When at last she returned to the unconscious Marianne, she found her
just awaking, refreshed by so long and sweet a sleep to the extent of
her hopes. Elinor's heart was full. The past, the present, the future,
Willoughby's visit, Marianne's safety, and her mother's expected
arrival, threw her altogether into an agitation of spirits which kept
off every indication of fatigue, and made her only fearful of
betraying herself to her sister. Short was the time, however, in which
that fear could affect her, for within half an hour after Willoughby's
leaving the house, she was again called down stairs by the sound of
another carriage. Eager to save her mother from every unnecessary
moment's horrible suspense, she ran immediately into the hall, and
reached the outward door just in time to receive and support her as
she entered it.

Mrs. Dashwood, whose terror as they drew near the house had produced
almost the conviction of Marianne's being no more, had no voice to
inquire after her, no voice even for Elinor; but _she_, waiting
neither for salutation nor inquiry, instantly gave the joyful relief;
and her mother, catching it with all her usual warmth, was in a moment
as much overcome by her happiness, as she had been before by her
fears. She was supported into the drawing-room between her daughter
and her friend; and there, shedding tears of joy, though still unable
to speak, embraced Elinor again and again, turning from her at
intervals to press Colonel Brandon's hand, with a look which spoke at
once her gratitude, and her conviction of his sharing with herself in
the bliss of the moment. He shared it, however, in a silence even
greater than her own.

As soon as Mrs. Dashwood had recovered herself, to see Marianne was
her first desire; and in two minutes she was with her beloved child,
rendered dearer to her than ever by absence, unhappiness, and danger.
Elinor's delight, as she saw what each felt in the meeting, was only
checked by an apprehension of its robbing Marianne of farther
sleep;--but Mrs. Dashwood could be calm, could be even prudent, when
the life of a child was at stake, and Marianne, satisfied in knowing
her mother was near her, and conscious of being too weak for
conversation, submitted readily to the silence and quiet prescribed by
every nurse around her. Mrs. Dashwood _would_ sit up with her all
night; and Elinor, in compliance with her mother's entreaty, went to
bed. But the rest, which one night entirely sleepless, and many hours
of the most wearing anxiety seemed to make requisite, was kept off by
irritation of spirits. Willoughby, "poor Willoughby," as she now
allowed herself to call him, was constantly in her thoughts; she would
not but have heard his vindication for the world, and now blamed, now
acquitted herself for having judged him so harshly before. But her
promise of relating it to her sister was invariably painful. She
dreaded the performance of it, dreaded what its effect on Marianne
might be; doubted whether after such an explanation she could ever be
happy with another; and for a moment wished Willoughby a widower.
Then, remembering Colonel Brandon, reproved herself, felt that to
_his_ sufferings and _his_ constancy far more than to his rival's, the
reward of her sister was due, and wished any thing rather than Mrs.
Willoughby's death.

The shock of Colonel Brandon's errand at Barton had been much softened
to Mrs. Dashwood by her own previous alarm; for so great was her
uneasiness about Marianne, that she had already determined to set out
for Cleveland on that very day, without waiting for any further
intelligence, and had so far settled her journey before his arrival,
that the Careys were then expected every moment to fetch Margaret
away, as her mother was unwilling to take her where there might be
infection.

Marianne continued to mend every day, and the brilliant cheerfulness
of Mrs. Dashwood's looks and spirits proved her to be, as she
repeatedly declared herself, one of the happiest women in the world.
Elinor could not hear the declaration, nor witness its proofs without
sometimes wondering whether her mother ever recollected Edward. But
Mrs. Dashwood, trusting to the temperate account of her own
disappointment which Elinor had sent her, was led away by the
exuberance of her joy to think only of what would increase it.
Marianne was restored to her from a danger in which, as she now began
to feel, her own mistaken judgment in encouraging the unfortunate
attachment to Willoughby, had contributed to place her; and in her
recovery she had yet another source of joy unthought of by Elinor. It
was thus imparted to her, as soon as any opportunity of private
conference between them occurred.

"At last we are alone. My Elinor, you do not yet know all my
happiness. Colonel Brandon loves Marianne. He has told me so himself."

Her daughter, feeling by turns both pleased and pained, surprised and
not surprised, was all silent attention.

"You are never like me, dear Elinor, or I should wonder at your
composure now. Had I sat down to wish for any possible good to my
family, I should have fixed on Colonel Brandon's marrying one of you
as the object most desirable. And I believe Marianne will be the most
happy with him of the two."

Elinor was half inclined to ask her reason for thinking so, because
satisfied that none founded on an impartial consideration of their
age, characters, or feelings, could be given;--but her mother must
always be carried away by her imagination on any interesting subject,
and therefore instead of an inquiry, she passed it off with a smile.

"He opened his whole heart to me yesterday as we travelled. It came
out quite unawares, quite undesignedly. I, you may well believe, could
talk of nothing but my child;--he could not conceal his distress; I
saw that it equalled my own, and he perhaps, thinking that mere
friendship, as the world now goes, would not justify so warm a
sympathy--or rather, not thinking at all, I suppose--giving way to
irresistible feelings, made me acquainted with his earnest, tender,
constant, affection for Marianne. He has loved her, my Elinor, ever
since the first moment of seeing her."

Here, however, Elinor perceived,--not the language, not the
professions of Colonel Brandon, but the natural embellishments of her
mother's active fancy, which fashioned every thing delightful to her
as it chose.

"His regard for her, infinitely surpassing anything that Willoughby
ever felt or feigned, as much more warm, as more sincere or constant,
which ever we are to call it, has subsisted through all the knowledge
of dear Marianne's unhappy prepossession for that worthless young man!
and without selfishness, without encouraging a hope! could he have
seen her happy with another. Such a noble mind! such openness, such
sincerity! No one can be deceived in _him._"

"Colonel Brandon's character," said Elinor, "as an excellent man, is
well established."

"I know it is," replied her mother seriously, "or after such a
warning, I should be the last to encourage such affection, or even to
be pleased by it. But his coming for me as he did, with such active,
such ready friendship, is enough to prove him one of the worthiest of
men."

"His character, however," answered Elinor, "does not rest on _one_ act
of kindness, to which his affection for Marianne, were humanity out of
the case, would have prompted him. To Mrs. Jennings, to the
Middletons, he has been long and intimately known; they equally love
and respect him; and even my own knowledge of him, though lately
acquired, is very considerable; and so highly do I value and esteem
him, that if Marianne can be happy with him, I shall be as ready as
yourself to think our connection the greatest blessing to us in the
world. What answer did you give him? Did you allow him to hope?"

"Oh! my love, I could not then talk of hope to him or to myself.
Marianne might at that moment be dying. But he did not ask for hope or
encouragement. His was an involuntary confidence, an irrepressible
effusion to a soothing friend, not an application to a parent. Yet
after a time I _did_ say, for at first I was quite overcome, that if
she lived, as I trusted she might, my greatest happiness would lie in
promoting their marriage; and since our arrival, since our delightful
security, I have repeated it to him more fully, have given him every
encouragement in my power. Time, a very little time, I tell him, will
do everything; Marianne's heart is not to be wasted for ever on such a
man as Willoughby. His own merits must soon secure it."

"To judge from the Colonel's spirits, however, you have not yet made
him equally sanguine."

"No. He thinks Marianne's affection too deeply rooted for any change
in it under a great length of time, and even supposing her heart again
free, is too diffident of himself to believe, that with such a
difference of age and disposition he could ever attach her. There,
however, he is quite mistaken. His age is only so much beyond hers as
to be an advantage, as to make his character and principles
fixed;--and his disposition, I am well convinced, is exactly the very
one to make your sister happy. And his person, his manners too, are
all in his favour. My partiality does not blind me; he certainly is
not so handsome as Willoughby--but at the same time, there is
something much more pleasing in his countenance. There was always a
something,--if you remember,--in Willoughby's eyes at times, which I
did not like."

Elinor could _not_ remember it;--but her mother, without waiting for
her assent, continued--

"And his manners, the Colonel's manners are not only more pleasing to
me than Willoughby's ever were, but they are of a kind I well know to
be more solidly attaching to Marianne. Their gentleness, their
genuine attention to other people, and their manly unstudied
simplicity is much more accordant with her real disposition, than the
liveliness--often artificial, and often ill-timed of the other. I am
very sure myself, that had Willoughby turned out as really amiable, as
he has proved himself the contrary, Marianne would yet never have been
so happy with _him_ as she will be with Colonel Brandon."

She paused. Her daughter could not quite agree with her, but her
dissent was not heard, and therefore gave no offence.

"At Delaford, she will be within an easy distance of me," added Mrs.
Dashwood, "even if I remain at Barton; and in all probability,--for I
hear it is a large village,--indeed there certainly _must_ be some
small house or cottage close by, that would suit us quite as well as
our present situation."

Poor Elinor!--here was a new scheme for getting her to Delaford!--but
her spirit was stubborn.

"His fortune too!--for at my time of life you know, everybody cares
about _that_;--and though I neither know nor desire to know, what it
really is, I am sure it must be a good one."

Here they were interrupted by the entrance of a third person, and
Elinor withdrew to think it all over in private, to wish success to
her friend, and yet in wishing it, to feel a pang for Willoughby.




CHAPTER XLVI


Marianne's illness, though weakening in its kind, had not been long
enough to make her recovery slow; and with youth, natural strength,
and her mother's presence in aid, it proceeded so smoothly as to
enable her to remove, within four days after the arrival of the
latter, into Mrs. Palmer's dressing-room. When there, at her own
particular request, for she was impatient to pour forth her thanks to
him for fetching her mother, Colonel Brandon was invited to visit her.

His emotion on entering the room, in seeing her altered looks, and in
receiving the pale hand which she immediately held out to him, was
such, as, in Elinor's conjecture, must arise from something more than
his affection for Marianne, or the consciousness of its being known to
others; and she soon discovered in his melancholy eye and varying
complexion as he looked at her sister, the probable recurrence of many
past scenes of misery to his mind, brought back by that resemblance
between Marianne and Eliza already acknowledged, and now strengthened
by the hollow eye, the sickly skin, the posture of reclining weakness,
and the warm acknowledgment of peculiar obligation.

Mrs. Dashwood, not less watchful of what passed than her daughter, but
with a mind very differently influenced, and therefore watching to
very different effect, saw nothing in the Colonel's behaviour but what
arose from the most simple and self-evident sensations, while in the
actions and words of Marianne she persuaded herself to think that
something more than gratitude already dawned.

At the end of another day or two, Marianne growing visibly stronger
every twelve hours, Mrs. Dashwood, urged equally by her own and her
daughter's wishes, began to talk of removing to Barton. On _her_
measures depended those of her two friends; Mrs. Jennings could not
quit Cleveland during the Dashwoods' stay; and Colonel Brandon was
soon brought, by their united request, to consider his own abode there
as equally determinate, if not equally indispensable. At his and Mrs.
Jennings's united request in return, Mrs. Dashwood was prevailed on to
accept the use of his carriage on her journey back, for the better
accommodation of her sick child; and the Colonel, at the joint
invitation of Mrs. Dashwood and Mrs. Jennings, whose active
good-nature made her friendly and hospitable for other people as well
as herself, engaged with pleasure to redeem it by a visit at the
cottage, in the course of a few weeks.

The day of separation and departure arrived; and Marianne, after
taking so particular and lengthened a leave of Mrs. Jennings, one so
earnestly grateful, so full of respect and kind wishes as seemed due
to her own heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention, and
bidding Colonel Brandon farewell with a cordiality of a friend, was
carefully assisted by him into the carriage, of which he seemed
anxious that she should engross at least half. Mrs. Dashwood and
Elinor then followed, and the others were left by themselves, to talk
of the travellers, and feel their own dullness, till Mrs. Jennings
was summoned to her chaise to take comfort in the gossip of her maid
for the loss of her two young companions; and Colonel Brandon
immediately afterwards took his solitary way to Delaford.

The Dashwoods were two days on the road, and Marianne bore her journey
on both, without essential fatigue. Every thing that the most zealous
affection, the most solicitous care could do to render her
comfortable, was the office of each watchful companion, and each found
their reward in her bodily ease, and her calmness of spirits. To
Elinor, the observation of the latter was particularly grateful. She,
who had seen her week after week so constantly suffering, oppressed by
anguish of heart which she had neither courage to speak of, nor
fortitude to conceal, now saw with a joy, which no other could equally
share, an apparent composure of mind, which, in being the result as
she trusted of serious reflection, must eventually lead her to
contentment and cheerfulness.

As they approached Barton, indeed, and entered on scenes of which
every field and every tree brought some peculiar, some painful
recollection, she grew silent and thoughtful, and turning away her
face from their notice, sat earnestly gazing through the window. But
here, Elinor could neither wonder nor blame; and when she saw, as she
assisted Marianne from the carriage, that she had been crying, she saw
only an emotion too natural in itself to raise any thing less tender
than pity, and in its unobtrusiveness entitled to praise. In the whole
of her subsequent manner, she traced the direction of a mind awakened
to reasonable exertion; for no sooner had they entered their common
sitting-room, than Marianne turned her eyes around it with a look of
resolute firmness, as if determined at once to accustom herself to the
sight of every object with which the remembrance of Willoughby could
be connected. She said little, but every sentence aimed at
cheerfulness, and though a sigh sometimes escaped her, it never passed
away without the atonement of a smile. After dinner she would try her
piano-forte. She went to it; but the music on which her eye first
rested was an opera, procured for her by Willoughby, containing some
of their favourite duets, and bearing on its outward leaf her own name
in his hand-writing. That would not do. She shook her head, put the
music aside, and after running over the keys for a minute, complained
of feebleness in her fingers, and closed the instrument again;
declaring however with firmness as she did so, that she should in
future practice much.

The next morning produced no abatement in these happy symptoms. On the
contrary, with a mind and body alike strengthened by rest, she looked
and spoke with more genuine spirit, anticipating the pleasure of
Margaret's return, and talking of the dear family party which would
then be restored, of their mutual pursuits and cheerful society, as
the only happiness worth a wish.

"When the weather is settled, and I have recovered my strength," said
she, "we will take long walks together every day. We will walk to the
farm at the edge of the down, and see how the children go on; we will
walk to Sir John's new plantations at Barton Cross, and the Abbeyland;
and we will often go the old ruins of the Priory, and try to trace its
foundations as far as we are told they once reached. I know we shall
be happy. I know the summer will pass happily away. I mean never to be
later in rising than six, and from that time till dinner I shall
divide every moment between music and reading. I have formed my plan,
and am determined to enter on a course of serious study. Our own
library is too well known to me, to be resorted to for any thing
beyond mere amusement. But there are many works well worth reading at
the Park; and there are others of more modern production which I know
I can borrow of Colonel Brandon. By reading only six hours a-day, I
shall gain in the course of a twelvemonth a great deal of instruction
which I now feel myself to want."

Elinor honoured her for a plan which originated so nobly as this;
though smiling to see the same eager fancy which had been leading her
to the extreme of languid indolence and selfish repining, now at work
in introducing excess into a scheme of such rational employment and
virtuous self-control. Her smile however changed to a sigh when she
remembered that promise to Willoughby was yet unfulfilled, and feared
she had that to communicate which might again unsettle the mind of
Marianne, and ruin at least for a time this fair prospect of busy
tranquillity. Willing therefore to delay the evil hour, she resolved
to wait till her sister's health were more secure, before she
appointed it. But the resolution was made only to be broken.

[Illustration: "_And see how the children go on._"]

Marianne had been two or three days at home, before the weather was
fine enough for an invalid like herself to venture out. But at last a
soft, genial morning appeared; such as might tempt the daughter's
wishes and the mother's confidence; and Marianne, leaning on Elinor's
arm, was authorised to walk as long as she could without fatigue, in
the lane before the house.

The sisters set out at a pace, slow as the feebleness of Marianne in
an exercise hitherto untried since her illness required;--and they had
advanced only so far beyond the house as to admit a full view of the
hill, the important hill behind, when pausing with her eyes turned
towards it, Marianne calmly said--

"There, exactly there,"--pointing with one hand, "on that projecting
mound,--there I fell; and there I first saw Willoughby."

Her voice sunk with the word, but presently reviving she added,

"I am thankful to find that I can look with so little pain on the
spot! shall we ever talk on that subject, Elinor?" hesitatingly it was
said. "Or will it be wrong? I can talk of it now, I hope, as I ought
to do."

Elinor tenderly invited her to be open.

"As for regret," said Marianne, "I have done with that, as far as _he_
is concerned. I do not mean to talk to you of what my feelings have
been for him, but what they are _now._ At present, if I could be
satisfied on one point, if I could be allowed to think that he was not
_always_ acting a part, not _always_ deceiving me; but above all, if I
could be assured that he never was so _very_ wicked as my fears have
sometimes fancied him, since the story of that unfortunate girl--"

She stopped. Elinor joyfully treasured her words as she answered--

"If you could be assured of that, you think you should be easy."

"Yes. My peace of mind is doubly involved in it; for not only is it
horrible to suspect a person, who has been what _he_ has been to _me_,
of such designs, but what must it make me appear to myself? What in a
situation like mine, but a most shamefully unguarded affection could
expose me to--"

"How then," asked her sister, "would you account for his behaviour?"

"I would suppose him--Oh, how gladly would I suppose him!--only
fickle, very, very fickle."

Elinor said no more. She was debating within herself on the
eligibility of beginning her story directly, or postponing it till
Marianne were in stronger health; and they crept on for a few minutes
in silence.

"I am not wishing him too much good," said Marianne at last with a
sigh, "when I wish his secret reflections may be no more unpleasant
than my own. He will suffer enough in them."

"Do you compare your conduct with his?"

"No. I compare it with what it ought to have been; I compare it with
yours."

"Our situations have borne little resemblance."

"They have borne more than our conduct. Do not, my dearest Elinor, let
your kindness defend what I know your judgment must censure. My illness
has made me think. It has given me leisure and calmness for serious
recollection. Long before I was enough recovered to talk, I was
perfectly able to reflect. I considered the past: I saw in my own
behaviour, since the beginning of our acquaintance with him last autumn,
nothing but a series of imprudence towards myself, and want of kindness
to others. I saw that my own feelings had prepared my sufferings, and
that my want of fortitude under them had almost led me to the grave. My
illness, I well knew, had been entirely brought on by myself by such
negligence of my own health, as I had felt even at the time to be wrong.
Had I died, it would have been self-destruction. I did not know my
danger till the danger was removed; but with such feelings as these
reflections gave me, I wonder at my recovery,--wonder that the very
eagerness of my desire to live, to have time for atonement to my God,
and to you all, did not kill me at once. Had I died, in what peculiar
misery should I have left you, my nurse, my friend, my sister! You, who
had seen all the fretful selfishness of my latter days; who had known
all the murmurings of my heart! How should I have lived in _your_
remembrance! My mother too! How could you have consoled her! I cannot
express my own abhorrence of myself. Whenever I looked towards the past,
I saw some duty neglected, or some failing indulged. Every body seemed
injured by me. The kindness, the unceasing kindness of Mrs. Jennings, I
had repaid with ungrateful contempt. To the Middletons, to the Palmers,
the Steeles, to every common acquaintance even, I had been insolent and
unjust; with a heart hardened against their merits, and a temper
irritated by their very attention. To John, to Fanny, yes, even to them,
little as they deserve, I had given less than their due. But you, you
above all, above my mother, had been wronged by me. I, and only I, knew
your heart and its sorrows; yet to what did it influence me?--not to any
compassion that could benefit you or myself. Your example was before me;
but to what avail? Was I more considerate of you and your comfort? Did I
imitate your forbearance, or lessen your restraints, by taking any part
in those offices of general complaisance or particular gratitude which
you had hitherto been left to discharge alone? No; not less when I knew
you to be unhappy, than when I had believed you at ease, did I turn away
from every exertion of duty or friendship; scarcely allowing sorrow to
exist but with me, regretting only _that_ heart which had deserted and
wronged me, and leaving you, for I professed an unbounded affection, to
be miserable for my sake."

Here ceased the rapid flow of her self-reproving spirit; and Elinor,
impatient to soothe, though too honest to flatter, gave her instantly
that praise and support which her frankness and her contrition so well
deserved. Marianne pressed her hand and replied--

"You are very good. The future must be my proof. I have laid down my
plan, and if I am capable of adhering to it--my feelings shall be
governed and my temper improved. They shall no longer worry others,
nor torture myself. I shall now live solely for my family. You, my
mother, and Margaret, must henceforth be all the world to me; you will
share my affections entirely between you. From you, from my home, I
shall never again have the smallest incitement to move; and if I do
mix in other society, it will be only to show that my spirit is
humbled, my heart amended, and that I can practise the civilities, the
lesser duties of life, with gentleness and forbearance. As for
Willoughby--to say that I shall soon or that I shall ever forget him,
would be idle. His remembrance can be overcome by no change of
circumstances or opinions. But it shall be regulated, it shall be
checked by religion, by reason, by constant employment."

She paused--and added in a low voice, "If I could but know _his_
heart, everything would become easy."

Elinor, who had now been for some time reflecting on the propriety or
impropriety of speedily hazarding her narration, without feeling at
all nearer decision than at first, heard this; and perceiving that as
reflection did nothing, resolution must do all, soon found herself
leading to the fact.

She managed the recital, as she hoped, with address; prepared her
anxious listener with caution; related simply and honestly the chief
points on which Willoughby grounded his apology; did justice to his
repentance, and softened only his protestations of present regard.
Marianne said not a word. She trembled, her eyes were fixed on the
ground, and her lips became whiter than even sickness had left them. A
thousand inquiries sprung up from her heart, but she dared not urge
one. She caught every syllable with panting eagerness; her hand,
unknowingly to herself, closely pressed her sister's, and tears
covered her cheeks.

Elinor, dreading her being tired, led her towards home; and till they
reached the door of the cottage, easily conjecturing what her
curiosity must be though no question was suffered to speak it, talked
of nothing but Willoughby, and their conversation together; and was
carefully minute in every particular of speech and look, where
minuteness could be safely indulged. As soon as they entered the
house, Marianne with a kiss of gratitude and these two words just
articulate through her tears, "Tell mama," withdrew from her sister
and walked slowly up stairs. Elinor would not attempt to disturb a
solitude so reasonable as what she now sought; and with a mind
anxiously pre-arranging its result, and a resolution of reviving the
subject again, should Marianne fail to do it, she turned into the
parlour to fulfill her parting injunction.




CHAPTER XLVII


Mrs. Dashwood did not hear unmoved the vindication of her former
favourite. She rejoiced in his being cleared from some part of his
imputed guilt;--she was sorry for him;--she wished him happy. But the
feelings of the past could not be recalled. Nothing could restore him
with a faith unbroken--a character unblemished, to Marianne. Nothing
could do away the knowledge of what the latter had suffered through
his means, nor remove the guilt of his conduct towards Eliza. Nothing
could replace him, therefore, in her former esteem, nor injure the
interests of Colonel Brandon.

Had Mrs. Dashwood, like her daughter, heard Willoughby's story from
himself,--had she witnessed his distress, and been under the influence
of his countenance and his manner, it is probable that her compassion
would have been greater. But it was neither in Elinor's power, nor in
her wish, to rouse such feelings in another, by her retailed
explanation, as had at first been called forth in herself. Reflection
had given calmness to her judgment, and sobered her own opinion of
Willoughby's deserts; she wished, therefore, to declare only the
simple truth, and lay open such facts as were really due to his
character, without any embellishment of tenderness to lead the fancy
astray.

In the evening, when they were all three together, Marianne began
voluntarily to speak of him again; but that it was not without an
effort, the restless, unquiet thoughtfulness in which she had been for
some time previously sitting, her rising colour, as she spoke, and her
unsteady voice, plainly showed.

"I wish to assure you both," said she, "that I see every thing--as you
can desire me to do."

Mrs. Dashwood would have interrupted her instantly with soothing
tenderness, had not Elinor, who really wished to hear her sister's
unbiased opinion, by an eager sign, engaged her silence. Marianne
slowly continued--

"It is a great relief to me--what Elinor told me this morning--I have
now heard exactly what I wished to hear."--For some moments her voice
was lost; but recovering herself, she added, and with greater calmness
than before--"I am now perfectly satisfied, I wish for no change. I
never could have been happy with him, after knowing, as sooner or
later I must have known, all this. I should have had no confidence, no
esteem. Nothing could have done it away to my feelings."

"I know it--I know it," cried her mother. "Happy with a man of
libertine practices!--With one who so injured the peace of the dearest
of our friends, and the best of men!--No--my Marianne has not a heart
to be made happy with such a man!--Her conscience, her sensitive
conscience, would have felt all that the conscience of her husband
ought to have felt."

Marianne sighed, and repeated, "I wish for no change."

"You consider the matter," said Elinor, "exactly as a good mind and a
sound understanding must consider it; and I dare say you perceive, as
well as myself, not only in this, but in many other circumstances,
reason enough to be convinced that your marriage must have involved
you in many certain troubles and disappointments, in which you would
have been poorly supported by an affection, on his side, much less
certain. Had you married, you must have been always poor. His
expensiveness is acknowledged even by himself, and his whole conduct
declares that self-denial is a word hardly understood by him. His
demands and your inexperience together, on a small, very small income,
must have brought on distresses which would not be the _less_ grievous
to you, from having been entirely unknown and unthought of before.
_Your_ sense of honour and honesty would have led you, I know, when
aware of your situation, to attempt all the economy that would appear
to you possible: and, perhaps, as long as your frugality retrenched
only on your own comfort, you might have been suffered to practice it,
but beyond that--and how little could the utmost of your single
management do to stop the ruin which had begun before your marriage?
beyond _that_, had you endeavoured, however reasonably, to abridge
_his_ enjoyments, is it not to be feared, that instead of prevailing
on feelings so selfish to consent to it, you would have lessened your
own influence on his heart, and made him regret the connection which
had involved him in such difficulties?"

Marianne's lips quivered, and she repeated the word "Selfish?" in a
tone that implied, "do you really think him selfish?"

"The whole of his behaviour," replied Elinor, "from the beginning to
the end of the affair, has been grounded on selfishness. It was
selfishness which first made him sport with your affections; which
afterwards, when his own were engaged, made him delay the confession
of it, and which finally carried him from Barton. His own enjoyment,
or his own ease, was, in every particular, his ruling principle."

"It is very true. _My_ happiness never was his object."

"At present," continued Elinor, "he regrets what he has done. And why
does he regret it?--Because he finds it has not answered towards
himself. It has not made him happy. His circumstances are now
unembarrassed--he suffers from no evil of that kind; and he thinks
only that he has married a woman of a less amiable temper than
yourself. But does it follow that had he married you, he would have
been happy?--The inconveniences would have been different. He would
then have suffered under the pecuniary distresses which, because they
are removed, he now reckons as nothing. He would have had a wife of
whose temper he could make no complaint, but he would have been always
necessitous--always poor; and probably would soon have learned to rank
the innumerable comforts of a clear estate and good income as of far
more importance, even to domestic happiness, than the mere temper of a
wife."

"I have not a doubt of it," said Marianne; "and I have nothing to
regret--nothing but my own folly."

"Rather say your mother's imprudence, my child," said Mrs. Dashwood;
"_she_ must be answerable."

Marianne would not let her proceed;--and Elinor, satisfied that each
felt their own error, wished to avoid any survey of the past that
might weaken her sister's spirits; she, therefore, pursuing the first
subject, immediately continued--

"One observation may, I think, be fairly drawn from the whole of the
story--that all Willoughby's difficulties have arisen from the first
offence against virtue, in his behaviour to Eliza Williams. That crime
has been the origin of every lesser one, and of all his present
discontents."

Marianne assented most feelingly to the remark; and her mother was led
by it to an enumeration of Colonel Brandon's injuries and merits, warm
as friendship and design could unitedly dictate. Her daughter did not
look, however, as if much of it were heard by her.

Elinor, according to her expectation, saw on the two or three
following days, that Marianne did not continue to gain strength as she
had done; but while her resolution was unsubdued, and she still tried
to appear cheerful and easy, her sister could safely trust to the
effect of time upon her health.

Margaret returned, and the family were again all restored to each
other, again quietly settled at the cottage; and if not pursuing their
usual studies with quite so much vigour as when they first came to
Barton, at least planning a vigorous prosecution of them in future.

Elinor grew impatient for some tidings of Edward. She had heard
nothing of him since her leaving London, nothing new of his plans,
nothing certain even of his present abode. Some letters had passed
between her and her brother, in consequence of Marianne's illness; and
in the first of John's, there had been this sentence:--"We know
nothing of our unfortunate Edward, and can make no enquiries on so
prohibited a subject, but conclude him to be still at Oxford"; which
was all the intelligence of Edward afforded her by the correspondence,
for his name was not even mentioned in any of the succeeding letters.
She was not doomed, however, to be long in ignorance of his measures.

Their man-servant had been sent one morning to Exeter on business; and
when, as he waited at table, he had satisfied the inquiries of his
mistress as to the event of his errand, this was his voluntary
communication--

"I suppose you know, ma'am, that Mr. Ferrars is married."

Marianne gave a violent start, fixed her eyes upon Elinor, saw her
turning pale, and fell back in her chair in hysterics. Mrs. Dashwood,
whose eyes, as she answered the servant's inquiry, had intuitively
taken the same direction, was shocked to perceive by Elinor's
countenance how much she really suffered, and a moment afterwards,
alike distressed by Marianne's situation, knew not on which child to
bestow her principal attention.

The servant, who saw only that Miss Marianne was taken ill, had sense
enough to call one of the maids, who, with Mrs. Dashwood's assistance,
supported her into the other room. By that time, Marianne was rather
better, and her mother leaving her to the care of Margaret and the
maid, returned to Elinor, who, though still much disordered, had so
far recovered the use of her reason and voice as to be just
beginning an inquiry of Thomas, as to the source of his intelligence.
Mrs. Dashwood immediately took all that trouble on herself; and Elinor
had the benefit of the information without the exertion of seeking it.

[Illustration: "_I suppose you know, ma'am, that Mr. Ferrars is
married._"]

"Who told you that Mr. Ferrars was married, Thomas?"

"I see Mr. Ferrars myself, ma'am, this morning in Exeter, and his lady
too, Miss Steele as was. They was stopping in a chaise at the door of
the New London Inn, as I went there with a message from Sally at the
Park to her brother, who is one of the post-boys. I happened to look
up as I went by the chaise, and so I see directly it was the youngest
Miss Steele; so I took off my hat, and she knew me and called to me,
and inquired after you, ma'am, and the young ladies, especially Miss
Marianne, and bid me I should give her compliments and Mr. Ferrars's,
their best compliments and service, and how sorry they was they had
not time to come on and see you, but they was in a great hurry to go
forwards, for they was going further down for a little while, but
however, when they come back, they'd make sure to come and see you."

"But did she tell you she was married, Thomas?"

"Yes, ma'am. She smiled, and said how she had changed her name since
she was in these parts. She was always a very affable and free-spoken
young lady, and very civil behaved. So, I made free to wish her joy."

"Was Mr. Ferrars in the carriage with her?"

"Yes, ma'am, I just see him leaning back in it, but he did not look
up;--he never was a gentleman much for talking."

Elinor's heart could easily account for his not putting himself
forward; and Mrs. Dashwood probably found the same explanation.

"Was there no one else in the carriage?"

"No, ma'am, only they two."

"Do you know where they came from?"

"They come straight from town, as Miss Lucy--Mrs. Ferrars told me."

"And are they going farther westward?"

"Yes, ma'am--but not to bide long. They will soon be back again, and
then they'd be sure and call here."

Mrs. Dashwood now looked at her daughter; but Elinor knew better than
to expect them. She recognised the whole of Lucy in the message, and
was very confident that Edward would never come near them. She
observed in a low voice, to her mother, that they were probably going
down to Mr. Pratt's, near Plymouth.

Thomas's intelligence seemed over. Elinor looked as if she wished to
hear more.

"Did you see them off, before you came away?"

"No, ma'am--the horses were just coming out, but I could not bide any
longer; I was afraid of being late."

"Did Mrs. Ferrars look well?"

"Yes, ma'am, she said how she was very well; and to my mind she was
always a very handsome young lady--and she seemed vastly contented."

Mrs. Dashwood could think of no other question, and Thomas and the
tablecloth, now alike needless, were soon afterwards dismissed.
Marianne had already sent to say, that she should eat nothing more.
Mrs. Dashwood's and Elinor's appetites were equally lost, and Margaret
might think herself very well off, that with so much uneasiness as
both her sisters had lately experienced, so much reason as they had
often had to be careless of their meals, she had never been obliged to
go without her dinner before.

When the dessert and the wine were arranged, and Mrs. Dashwood and
Elinor were left by themselves, they remained long together in a
similarity of thoughtfulness and silence. Mrs. Dashwood feared to
hazard any remark, and ventured not to offer consolation. She now
found that she had erred in relying on Elinor's representation of
herself; and justly concluded that every thing had been expressly
softened at the time, to spare her from an increase of unhappiness,
suffering as she then had suffered for Marianne. She found that she
had been misled by the careful, the considerate attention of her
daughter, to think the attachment, which once she had so well
understood, much slighter in reality, than she had been wont to
believe, or than it was now proved to be. She feared that under this
persuasion she had been unjust, inattentive, nay, almost unkind, to
her Elinor; that Marianne's affliction, because more acknowledged,
more immediately before her, had too much engrossed her tenderness,
and led her away to forget that in Elinor she might have a daughter
suffering almost as much, certainly with less self-provocation, and
greater fortitude.




CHAPTER XLVIII


Elinor now found the difference between the expectation of an
unpleasant event, however certain the mind may be told to consider it,
and certainty itself. She now found, that in spite of herself, she had
always admitted a hope, while Edward remained single, that something
would occur to prevent his marrying Lucy; that some resolution of his
own, some mediation of friends, or some more eligible opportunity of
establishment for the lady, would arise to assist the happiness of
all. But he was now married; and she condemned her heart for the
lurking flattery, which so much heightened the pain of the
intelligence.

That he should be married soon, before (as she imagined) he could be
in orders, and consequently before he could be in possession of the
living, surprised her a little at first. But she soon saw how likely
it was that Lucy, in her self-provident care, in her haste to secure
him, should overlook every thing but the risk of delay. They were
married, married in town, and now hastening down to her uncle's. What
had Edward felt on being within four miles from Barton, on seeing her
mother's servant, on hearing Lucy's message!

They would soon, she supposed, be settled at
Delaford;--Delaford,--that place in which so much conspired to give
her an interest; which she wished to be acquainted with, and yet
desired to avoid. She saw them in an instant in their parsonage-house;
saw in Lucy, the active, contriving manager, uniting at once a desire
of smart appearance with the utmost frugality, and ashamed to be
suspected of half her economical practices; pursuing her own interest
in every thought, courting the favour of Colonel Brandon, of Mrs.
Jennings, and of every wealthy friend. In Edward, she knew not what
she saw, nor what she wished to see. Happy or unhappy, nothing pleased
her; she turned away her head from every sketch of him.

Elinor flattered herself that some one of their connections in London
would write to them to announce the event, and give farther
particulars,--but day after day passed off, and brought no letter, no
tidings. Though uncertain that any one were to blame, she found fault
with every absent friend. They were all thoughtless or indolent.

"When do you write to Colonel Brandon, ma'am?" was an inquiry which
sprung from the impatience of her mind to have something going on.

"I wrote to him, my love, last week, and rather expect to see, than to
hear from him again. I earnestly pressed his coming to us, and should
not be surprised to see him walk in today or tomorrow, or any day."

This was gaining something, something to look forward to. Colonel
Brandon must have some information to give.

Scarcely had she so determined it, when the figure of a man on
horseback drew her eyes to the window. He stopped at their gate. It
was a gentleman, it was Colonel Brandon himself. Now she could hear
more; and she trembled in expectation of it. But--it was _not_ Colonel
Brandon--neither his air--nor his height. Were it possible, she must
say it must be Edward. She looked again. He had just dismounted;--she
could not be mistaken,--it _was_ Edward. She moved away and sat down.
"He comes from Mr. Pratt's purposely to see us. I _will_ be calm, I
_will_ be mistress of myself."

In a moment she perceived that the others were likewise aware of the
mistake. She saw her mother and Marianne change colour; saw them look
at herself, and whisper a few sentences to each other. She would have
given the world to be able to speak--and to make them understand that
she hoped no coolness, no slight, would appear in their behaviour to
him;--but she had no utterance, and was obliged to leave all to their
own discretion.

Not a syllable passed aloud. They all waited in silence for the
appearance of their visitor. His footsteps were heard along the gravel
path; in a moment he was in the passage, and in another he was before
them.

His countenance, as he entered the room, was not too happy, even for
Elinor. His complexion was white with agitation, and he looked as if
fearful of his reception, and conscious that he merited no kind one.
Mrs. Dashwood, however, conforming, as she trusted, to the wishes of
that daughter, by whom she then meant in the warmth of her heart to be
guided in every thing, met with a look of forced complacency, gave him
her hand, and wished him joy.

[Illustration: _It was Edward._]

He coloured, and stammered out an unintelligible reply. Elinor's lips
had moved with her mother's, and, when the moment of action was over,
she wished that she had shaken hands with him too. But it was then too
late, and with a countenance meaning to be open, she sat down again
and talked of the weather.

Marianne had retreated as much as possible out of sight, to conceal
her distress; and Margaret, understanding some part, but not the whole
of the case, thought it incumbent on her to be dignified, and
therefore took a seat as far from him as she could, and maintained a
strict silence.

When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness of the season, a very
awful pause took place. It was put an end to by Mrs. Dashwood, who
felt obliged to hope that he had left Mrs. Ferrars very well. In a
hurried manner, he replied in the affirmative.

Another pause.

Elinor resolving to exert herself, though fearing the sound of her own
voice, now said--

"Is Mrs. Ferrars at Longstaple?"

"At Longstaple!" he replied, with an air of surprise. "No, my mother
is in town."

"I meant," said Elinor, taking up some work from the table, "to
inquire for Mrs. _Edward_ Ferrars."

She dared not look up;--but her mother and Marianne both turned their
eyes on him. He coloured, seemed perplexed, looked doubtingly, and,
after some hesitation, said,--

"Perhaps you mean--my brother--you mean Mrs.--Mrs. _Robert_ Ferrars."

"Mrs. Robert Ferrars!"--was repeated by Marianne and her mother in an
accent of the utmost amazement;--and though Elinor could not speak,
even _her_ eyes were fixed on him with the same impatient wonder. He
rose from his seat, and walked to the window, apparently from not
knowing what to do; took up a pair of scissors that lay there, and
while spoiling both them and their sheath by cutting the latter to
pieces as he spoke, said, in a hurried voice--

"Perhaps you do not know--you may not have heard that my brother is
lately married to--to the youngest--to Miss Lucy Steele."

His words were echoed with unspeakable astonishment by all but
Elinor, who sat with her head leaning over her work, in a state of
such agitation as made her hardly know where she was.

"Yes," said he, "they were married last week, and are now at Dawlish."

Elinor could sit it no longer. She almost ran out of the room, and as
soon as the door was closed, burst into tears of joy, which at first
she thought would never cease. Edward, who had till then looked any
where, rather than at her, saw her hurry away, and perhaps saw, or
even heard, her emotion; for immediately afterwards he fell into a
reverie, which no remarks, no inquiries, no affectionate address of
Mrs. Dashwood could penetrate, and at last, without saying a word,
quitted the room, and walked out towards the village, leaving the
others in the greatest astonishment and perplexity on a change in his
situation, so wonderful and so sudden,--a perplexity which they had no
means of lessening but by their own conjectures.




CHAPTER XLIX


Unaccountable, however, as the circumstances of his release might
appear to the whole family, it was certain that Edward was free; and
to what purpose that freedom would be employed was easily
pre-determined by all;--for after experiencing the blessings of _one_
imprudent engagement, contracted without his mother's consent, as he
had already done for more than four years, nothing less could be
expected of him in the failure of _that_, than the immediate
contraction of another.

His errand at Barton, in fact, was a simple one. It was only to ask
Elinor to marry him;--and considering that he was not altogether
inexperienced in such a question, it might be strange that he should
feel so uncomfortable in the present case as he really did, so much in
need of encouragement and fresh air.

How soon he had walked himself into the proper resolution, however,
how soon an opportunity of exercising it occurred, in what manner he
expressed himself, and how he was received, need not be particularly
told. This only need be said;--that when they all sat down to table at
four o'clock, about three hours after his arrival, he had secured his
lady, engaged her mother's consent, and was not only in the rapturous
profession of the lover, but, in the reality of reason and truth, one
of the happiest of men. His situation indeed was more than commonly
joyful. He had more than the ordinary triumph of accepted love to
swell his heart, and raise his spirits. He was released without any
reproach to himself, from an entanglement which had long formed his
misery, from a woman whom he had long ceased to love; and elevated at
once to that security with another, which he must have thought of
almost with despair, as soon as he had learnt to consider it with
desire. He was brought, not from doubt or suspense, but from misery to
happiness; and the change was openly spoken in such a genuine,
flowing, grateful cheerfulness, as his friends had never witnessed in
him before.

His heart was now open to Elinor, all its weaknesses, all its errors
confessed, and his first boyish attachment to Lucy treated with all
the philosophic dignity of twenty-four.

"It was a foolish, idle inclination on my side," said he, "the
consequence of ignorance of the world and want of employment. Had my
brother given me some active profession when I was removed at eighteen
from the care of Mr. Pratt, I think, nay, I am sure, it would never
have happened; for though I left Longstaple with what I thought, at
the time, a most unconquerable preference for his niece, yet had I
then had any pursuit, any object to engage my time and keep me at a
distance from her for a few months, I should very soon have outgrown
the fancied attachment, especially by mixing more with the world, as
in such case I must have done. But instead of having any thing to do,
instead of having any profession chosen for me, or being allowed to
choose any myself, I returned home to be completely idle; and for the
first twelvemonth afterwards I had not even the nominal employment,
which belonging to the university would have given me; for I was not
entered at Oxford till I was nineteen. I had therefore nothing in the
world to do, but to fancy myself in love; and as my mother did not
make my home in every respect comfortable, as I had no friend, no
companion in my brother, and disliked new acquaintance, it was not
unnatural for me to be very often at Longstaple, where I always felt
myself at home, and was always sure of a welcome; and accordingly I
spent the greatest part of my time there from eighteen to nineteen:
Lucy appeared everything that was amiable and obliging. She was pretty
too--at least I thought so _then_; and I had seen so little of other
women, that I could make no comparisons, and see no defects.
Considering everything, therefore, I hope, foolish as our engagement
was, foolish as it has since in every way been proved, it was not at
the time an unnatural or an inexcusable piece of folly."

The change which a few hours had wrought in the minds and the
happiness of the Dashwoods, was such--so great--as promised them all,
the satisfaction of a sleepless night. Mrs. Dashwood, too happy to be
comfortable, knew not how to love Edward, nor praise Elinor enough,
how to be enough thankful for his release without wounding his
delicacy, nor how at once to give them leisure for unrestrained
conversation together, and yet enjoy, as she wished, the sight and
society of both.

Marianne could speak _her_ happiness only by tears. Comparisons would
occur--regrets would arise;--and her joy, though sincere as her love
for her sister, was of a kind to give her neither spirits nor
language.

But Elinor--how are _her_ feelings to be described? From the moment of
learning that Lucy was married to another, that Edward was free, to
the moment of his justifying the hopes which had so instantly
followed, she was every thing by turns but tranquil. But when the
second moment had passed, when she found every doubt, every solicitude
removed, compared her situation with what so lately it had been,--saw
him honourably released from his former engagement,--saw him instantly
profiting by the release, to address herself and declare an affection
as tender, as constant as she had ever supposed it to be,--she was
oppressed, she was overcome by her own felicity; and happily disposed
as is the human mind to be easily familiarized with any change for the
better, it required several hours to give sedateness to her spirits,
or any degree of tranquillity to her heart.

Edward was now fixed at the cottage at least for a week;--for whatever
other claims might be made on him, it was impossible that less than a
week should be given up to the enjoyment of Elinor's company, or
suffice to say half that was to be said of the past, the present, and
the future;--for though a very few hours spent in the hard labor of
incessant talking will despatch more subjects than can really be in
common between any two rational creatures, yet with lovers it is
different. Between _them_ no subject is finished, no communication is
even made, till it has been made at least twenty times over.

Lucy's marriage, the unceasing and reasonable wonder among them all,
formed of course one of the earliest discussions of the lovers;--and
Elinor's particular knowledge of each party made it appear to her in
every view, as one of the most extraordinary and unaccountable
circumstances she had ever heard. How they could be thrown together,
and by what attraction Robert could be drawn on to marry a girl, of
whose beauty she had herself heard him speak without any
admiration,--a girl too already engaged to his brother, and on whose
account that brother had been thrown off by his family--it was beyond
her comprehension to make out. To her own heart it was a delightful
affair, to her imagination it was even a ridiculous one, but to her
reason, her judgment, it was completely a puzzle.

Edward could only attempt an explanation by supposing, that, perhaps,
at first accidentally meeting, the vanity of the one had been so
worked on by the flattery of the other, as to lead by degrees to all
the rest. Elinor remembered what Robert had told her in Harley Street,
of his opinion of what his own mediation in his brother's affairs
might have done, if applied to in time. She repeated it to Edward.

"_That_ was exactly like Robert," was his immediate observation. "And
_that_," he presently added, "might perhaps be in _his_ head when the
acquaintance between them first began. And Lucy perhaps at first might
think only of procuring his good offices in my favour. Other designs
might afterward arise."

How long it had been carrying on between them, however, he was equally
at a loss with herself to make out; for at Oxford, where he had
remained for choice ever since his quitting London, he had had no
means of hearing of her but from herself, and her letters to the very
last were neither less frequent, nor less affectionate than usual. Not
the smallest suspicion, therefore, had ever occurred to prepare him
for what followed;--and when at last it burst on him in a letter from
Lucy herself, he had been for some time, he believed, half stupified
between the wonder, the horror, and the joy of such a deliverance. He
put the letter into Elinor's hands.

"DEAR SIR,

     "Being very sure I have long lost your affections, I have
     thought myself at liberty to bestow my own on another, and
     have no doubt of being as happy with him as I once used to
     think I might be with you; but I scorn to accept a hand
     while the heart was another's. Sincerely wish you happy in
     your choice, and it shall not be my fault if we are not
     always good friends, as our near relationship now makes
     proper. I can safely say I owe you no ill-will, and am sure
     you will be too generous to do us any ill offices. Your
     brother has gained my affections entirely, and as we could
     not live without one another, we are just returned from the
     altar, and are now on our way to Dawlish for a few weeks,
     which place your dear brother has great curiosity to see,
     but thought I would first trouble you with these few lines,
     and shall always remain--

     "Your sincere well-wisher, friend, and sister,

     "LUCY FERRARS."

     "I have burnt all your letters, and will return your picture
     the first opportunity. Please to destroy my scrawls--but the
     ring with my hair you are very welcome to keep."

Elinor read and returned it without any comment.

"I will not ask your opinion of it as a composition," said Edward.
"For worlds would not I have had a letter of hers seen by _you_ in
former days. In a sister it is bad enough, but in a wife! how I have
blushed over the pages of her writing! and I believe I may say that
since the first half year of our foolish business this is the only
letter I ever received from her, of which the substance made me any
amends for the defect of the style."

"However it may have come about," said Elinor, after a pause,--"they
are certainly married. And your mother has brought on herself a most
appropriate punishment. The independence she settled on Robert,
through resentment against you, has put it in his power to make his
own choice; and she has actually been bribing one son with a thousand
a-year, to do the very deed which she disinherited the other for
intending to do. She will hardly be less hurt, I suppose, by Robert's
marrying Lucy, than she would have been by your marrying her."

"She will be more hurt by it, for Robert always was her favourite. She
will be more hurt by it, and on the same principle will forgive him
much sooner."

In what state the affair stood at present between them, Edward knew
not, for no communication with any of his family had yet been
attempted by him. He had quitted Oxford within four and twenty hours
after Lucy's letter arrived, and with only one object before him, the
nearest road to Barton, had had no leisure to form any scheme of
conduct, with which that road did not hold the most intimate
connection. He could do nothing till he were assured of his fate with
Miss Dashwood; and by his rapidity in seeking _that_ fate, it is to be
supposed, in spite of the jealousy with which he had once thought of
Colonel Brandon, in spite of the modesty with which he rated his own
deserts, and the politeness with which he talked of his doubts, he did
not, upon the whole, expect a very cruel reception. It was his
business, however, to say that he _did_, and he said it very prettily.
What he might say on the subject a twelvemonth after, must be referred
to the imagination of husbands and wives.

That Lucy had certainly meant to deceive, to go off with a flourish of
malice against him in her message by Thomas, was perfectly clear to
Elinor; and Edward himself, now thoroughly enlightened on her
character, had no scruple in believing her capable of the utmost
meanness of wanton ill-nature. Though his eyes had been long opened,
even before his acquaintance with Elinor began, to her ignorance and a
want of liberality in some of her opinions, they had been equally
imputed, by him, to her want of education; and till her last letter
reached him, he had always believed her to be a well-disposed,
good-hearted girl, and thoroughly attached to himself. Nothing but
such a persuasion could have prevented his putting an end to an
engagement, which, long before the discovery of it laid him open to
his mother's anger, had been a continual source of disquiet and regret
to him.

"I thought it my duty," said he, "independent of my feelings, to give
her the option of continuing the engagement or not, when I was
renounced by my mother, and stood to all appearance without a friend
in the world to assist me. In such a situation as that, where there
seemed nothing to tempt the avarice or the vanity of any living
creature, how could I suppose, when she so earnestly, so warmly
insisted on sharing my fate, whatever it might be, that any thing but
the most disinterested affection was her inducement? And even now, I
cannot comprehend on what motive she acted, or what fancied advantage
it could be to her, to be fettered to a man for whom she had not the
smallest regard, and who had only two thousand pounds in the world.
She could not foresee that Colonel Brandon would give me a living."

"No; but she might suppose that something would occur in your favour;
that your own family might in time relent. And at any rate, she lost
nothing by continuing the engagement, for she has proved that it
fettered neither her inclination nor her actions. The connection was
certainly a respectable one, and probably gained her consideration
among her friends; and, if nothing more advantageous occurred, it
would be better for her to marry _you_ than be single."

Edward was, of course, immediately convinced that nothing could have
been more natural than Lucy's conduct, nor more self-evident than the
motive of it.

Elinor scolded him, harshly as ladies always scold the imprudence
which compliments themselves, for having spent so much time with them
at Norland, when he must have felt his own inconstancy.

"Your behaviour was certainly very wrong," said she; "because--to say
nothing of my own conviction, our relations were all led away by it to
fancy and expect _what_, as you were _then_ situated, could never be."

He could only plead an ignorance of his own heart, and a mistaken
confidence in the force of his engagement.

"I was simple enough to think, that because my _faith_ was plighted to
another, there could be no danger in my being with you; and that the
consciousness of my engagement was to keep my heart as safe and sacred
as my honour. I felt that I admired you, but I told myself it was only
friendship; and till I began to make comparisons between yourself and
Lucy, I did not know how far I was got. After that, I suppose, I _was_
wrong in remaining so much in Sussex, and the arguments with which I
reconciled myself to the expediency of it, were no better than
these:--The danger is my own; I am doing no injury to anybody but
myself."

Elinor smiled, and shook her head.

Edward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon's being expected at the
Cottage, as he really wished not only to be better acquainted with
him, but to have an opportunity of convincing him that he no longer
resented his giving him the living of Delaford--"Which, at present,"
said he, "after thanks so ungraciously delivered as mine were on the
occasion, he must think I have never forgiven him for offering."

_Now_ he felt astonished himself that he had never yet been to the
place. But so little interest had he taken in the matter, that he owed
all his knowledge of the house, garden, and glebe, extent of the
parish, condition of the land, and rate of the tithes, to Elinor
herself, who had heard so much of it from Colonel Brandon, and heard
it with so much attention, as to be entirely mistress of the subject.

One question after this only remained undecided, between them, one
difficulty only was to be overcome. They were brought together by
mutual affection, with the warmest approbation of their real friends;
their intimate knowledge of each other seemed to make their happiness
certain--and they only wanted something to live upon. Edward had two
thousand pounds, and Elinor one, which, with Delaford living, was all
that they could call their own; for it was impossible that Mrs.
Dashwood should advance anything; and they were neither of them quite
enough in love to think that three hundred and fifty pounds a-year
would supply them with the comforts of life.

Edward was not entirely without hopes of some favourable change in his
mother towards him; and on _that_ he rested for the residue of their
income. But Elinor had no such dependence; for since Edward would
still be unable to marry Miss Morton, and his choosing herself had
been spoken of in Mrs. Ferrars's flattering language as only a lesser
evil than his choosing Lucy Steele, she feared that Robert's offence
would serve no other purpose than to enrich Fanny.

About four days after Edward's arrival Colonel Brandon appeared, to
complete Mrs. Dashwood's satisfaction, and to give her the dignity of
having, for the first time since her living at Barton, more company
with her than her house would hold. Edward was allowed to retain the
privilege of first comer, and Colonel Brandon therefore walked every
night to his old quarters at the Park; from whence he usually returned
in the morning, early enough to interrupt the lovers' first
tête-à-tête before breakfast.

A three weeks' residence at Delaford, where, in his evening hours at
least, he had little to do but to calculate the disproportion between
thirty-six and seventeen, brought him to Barton in a temper of mind
which needed all the improvement in Marianne's looks, all the kindness
of her welcome, and all the encouragement of her mother's language, to
make it cheerful. Among such friends, however, and such flattery, he
did revive. No rumour of Lucy's marriage had yet reached him:--he knew
nothing of what had passed; and the first hours of his visit were
consequently spent in hearing and in wondering. Every thing was
explained to him by Mrs. Dashwood, and he found fresh reason to
rejoice in what he had done for Mr. Ferrars, since eventually it
promoted the interest of Elinor.

It would be needless to say, that the gentlemen advanced in the good
opinion of each other, as they advanced in each other's acquaintance,
for it could not be otherwise. Their resemblance in good principles
and good sense, in disposition and manner of thinking, would probably
have been sufficient to unite them in friendship, without any other
attraction; but their being in love with two sisters, and two sisters
fond of each other, made that mutual regard inevitable and immediate,
which might otherwise have waited the effect of time and judgment.

The letters from town, which a few days before would have made every
nerve in Elinor's body thrill with transport, now arrived to be read
with less emotion that mirth. Mrs. Jennings wrote to tell the
wonderful tale, to vent her honest indignation against the jilting
girl, and pour forth her compassion towards poor Mr. Edward, who, she
was sure, had quite doted upon the worthless hussy, and was now, by
all accounts, almost broken-hearted, at Oxford. "I do think," she
continued, "nothing was ever carried on so sly; for it was but two
days before Lucy called and sat a couple of hours with me. Not a soul
suspected anything of the matter, not even Nancy, who, poor soul! came
crying to me the day after, in a great fright for fear of Mrs.
Ferrars, as well as not knowing how to get to Plymouth; for Lucy it
seems borrowed all her money before she went off to be married, on
purpose we suppose to make a show with, and poor Nancy had not seven
shillings in the world;--so I was very glad to give her five guineas
to take her down to Exeter, where she thinks of staying three or four
weeks with Mrs. Burgess, in hopes, as I tell her, to fall in with the
Doctor again. And I must say that Lucy's crossness not to take them
along with them in the chaise is worse than all. Poor Mr. Edward! I
cannot get him out of my head, but you must send for him to Barton,
and Miss Marianne must try to comfort him."

Mr. Dashwood's strains were more solemn. Mrs. Ferrars was the most
unfortunate of women--poor Fanny had suffered agonies of
sensibility--and he considered the existence of each, under such a
blow, with grateful wonder. Robert's offence was unpardonable, but
Lucy's was infinitely worse. Neither of them were ever again to be
mentioned to Mrs. Ferrars; and even, if she might hereafter be induced
to forgive her son, his wife should never be acknowledged as her
daughter, nor be permitted to appear in her presence. The secrecy with
which everything had been carried on between them, was rationally
treated as enormously heightening the crime, because, had any
suspicion of it occurred to the others, proper measures would have
been taken to prevent the marriage; and he called on Elinor to join
with him in regretting that Lucy's engagement with Edward had not
rather been fulfilled, than that she should thus be the means of
spreading misery farther in the family. He thus continued:--

"Mrs. Ferrars has never yet mentioned Edward's name, which does not
surprise us; but, to our great astonishment, not a line has been
received from him on the occasion. Perhaps, however, he is kept silent
by his fear of offending, and I shall, therefore, give him a hint, by
a line to Oxford, that his sister and I both think a letter of proper
submission from him, addressed perhaps to Fanny, and by her shown to
her mother, might not be taken amiss; for we all know the tenderness
of Mrs. Ferrars's heart, and that she wishes for nothing so much as to
be on good terms with her children."

This paragraph was of some importance to the prospects and conduct of
Edward. It determined him to attempt a reconciliation, though not
exactly in the manner pointed out by their brother and sister.

"A letter of proper submission!" repeated he; "would they have me beg
my mother's pardon for Robert's ingratitude to _her_, and breach of
honour to _me_? I can make no submission. I am grown neither humble
nor penitent by what has passed. I am grown very happy; but that would
not interest. I know of no submission that _is_ proper for me to
make."

"You may certainly ask to be forgiven," said Elinor, "because you have
offended;--and I should think you might _now_ venture so far as to
profess some concern for having ever formed the engagement which drew
on you your mother's anger."

He agreed that he might.

"And when she has forgiven you, perhaps a little humility may be
convenient while acknowledging a second engagement, almost as
imprudent in _her_ eyes as the first."

He had nothing to urge against it, but still resisted the idea of a
letter of proper submission; and therefore, to make it easier to him,
as he declared a much greater willingness to make mean concessions by
word of mouth than on paper, it was resolved that, instead of writing
to Fanny, he should go to London, and personally entreat her good
offices in his favour. "And if they really _do_ interest themselves,"
said Marianne, in her new character of candour, "in bringing about a
reconciliation, I shall think that even John and Fanny are not
entirely without merit."

After a visit on Colonel Brandon's side of only three or four days,
the two gentlemen quitted Barton together. They were to go immediately
to Delaford, that Edward might have some personal knowledge of his
future home, and assist his patron and friend in deciding on what
improvements were needed to it; and from thence, after staying there a
couple of nights, he was to proceed on his journey to town.




CHAPTER L


After a proper resistance on the part of Mrs. Ferrars, just so violent
and so steady as to preserve her from that reproach which she always
seemed fearful of incurring, the reproach of being too amiable, Edward
was admitted to her presence, and pronounced to be again her son.

Her family had of late been exceedingly fluctuating. For many years of
her life she had had two sons; but the crime and annihilation of
Edward a few weeks ago, had robbed her of one; the similar
annihilation of Robert had left her for a fortnight without any; and
now, by the resuscitation of Edward, she had one again.

In spite of his being allowed once more to live, however, he did not
feel the continuance of his existence secure, till he had revealed his
present engagement; for the publication of that circumstance, he
feared, might give a sudden turn to his constitution, and carry him
off as rapidly as before. With apprehensive caution therefore it was
revealed, and he was listened to with unexpected calmness. Mrs.
Ferrars at first reasonably endeavoured to dissuade him from marrying
Miss Dashwood, by every argument in her power; told him, that in Miss
Morton he would have a woman of higher rank and larger fortune; and
enforced the assertion, by observing that Miss Morton was the daughter
of a nobleman with thirty thousand pounds, while Miss Dashwood was
only the daughter of a private gentleman with no more than _three_;
but when she found that, though perfectly admitting the truth of her
representation, he was by no means inclined to be guided by it, she
judged it wisest, from the experience of the past, to submit; and
therefore, after such an ungracious delay as she owed to her own
dignity, and as served to prevent every suspicion of good-will, she
issued her decree of consent to the marriage of Edward and Elinor.

What she would engage to do towards augmenting their income was next
to be considered; and here it plainly appeared, that though Edward was
now her only son, he was by no means her eldest; for while Robert was
inevitably endowed with a thousand pounds a-year, not the smallest
objection was made against Edward's taking orders for the sake of two
hundred and fifty at the utmost; nor was anything promised either for
the present or in future, beyond the ten thousand pounds, which had
been given with Fanny.

It was as much, however, as was desired, and more than was expected,
by Edward and Elinor; and Mrs. Ferrars herself, by her shuffling
excuses, seemed the only person surprised at her not giving more.

With an income quite sufficient to their wants thus secured to them,
they had nothing to wait for after Edward was in possession of the
living, but the readiness of the house, to which Colonel Brandon, with
an eager desire for the accommodation of Elinor, was making
considerable improvements; and after waiting some time for their
completion, after experiencing, as usual, a thousand disappointments
and delays from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workmen, Elinor,
as usual, broke through the first positive resolution of not marrying
till every thing was ready, and the ceremony took place in Barton
church early in the autumn.

The first month after their marriage was spent with their friend at
the Mansion-house; from whence they could superintend the progress of
the Parsonage, and direct every thing as they liked on the
spot;--could choose papers, project shrubberies, and invent a sweep.
Mrs. Jennings's prophecies, though rather jumbled together, were
chiefly fulfilled; for she was able to visit Edward and his wife in
their Parsonage by Michaelmas, and she found in Elinor and her
husband, as she really believed, one of the happiest couples in the
world. They had in fact nothing to wish for, but the marriage of
Colonel Brandon and Marianne, and rather better pasturage for their
cows.

They were visited on their first settling by almost all their
relations and friends. Mrs. Ferrars came to inspect the happiness
which she was almost ashamed of having authorised; and even the
Dashwoods were at the expense of a journey from Sussex to do them
honour.

"I will not say that I am disappointed, my dear sister," said John, as
they were walking together one morning before the gates of Delaford
House, "_that_ would be saying too much, for certainly you have been
one of the most fortunate young women in the world, as it is. But, I
confess, it would give me great pleasure to call Colonel Brandon
brother. His property here, his place, his house,--every thing is in
such respectable and excellent condition! And his woods,--I have not
seen such timber any where in Dorsetshire, as there is now standing in
Delaford Hanger! And though, perhaps, Marianne may not seem exactly
the person to attract him, yet I think it would altogether be
advisable for you to have them now frequently staying with you, for as
Colonel Brandon seems a great deal at home, nobody can tell what may
happen; for, when people are much thrown together, and see little of
anybody else,--and it will always be in your power to set her off to
advantage, and so forth. In short, you may as well give her a chance;
You understand me."

But though Mrs. Ferrars _did_ come to see them, and always treated
them with the make-believe of decent affection, they were never
insulted by her real favour and preference. _That_ was due to the
folly of Robert, and the cunning of his wife; and it was earned by
them before many months had passed away. The selfish sagacity of the
latter, which had at first drawn Robert into the scrape, was the
principal instrument of his deliverance from it; for her respectful
humility, assiduous attentions, and endless flatteries, as soon as the
smallest opening was given for their exercise, reconciled Mrs. Ferrars
to his choice, and re-established him completely in her favour.

[Illustration: _Everything in such respectable condition_]

The whole of Lucy's behaviour in the affair, and the prosperity which
crowned it, therefore, may be held forth as a most encouraging
instance of what an earnest, an unceasing attention to self-interest,
however its progress may be apparently obstructed, will do in securing
every advantage of fortune, with no other sacrifice than that of time
and conscience. When Robert first sought her acquaintance, and
privately visited her in Bartlett's Buildings, it was only with the
view imputed to him by his brother. He merely meant to persuade her to
give up the engagement; and as there could be nothing to overcome but
the affection of both, he naturally expected that one or two
interviews would settle the matter. In that point, however, and that
only, he erred; for though Lucy soon gave him hopes that his eloquence
would convince her in _time_, another visit, another conversation, was
always wanted to produce this conviction. Some doubts always lingered
in her mind when they parted, which could only be removed by another
half hour's discourse with himself. His attendance was by this means
secured, and the rest followed in course. Instead of talking of
Edward, they came gradually to talk only of Robert,--a subject on
which he had always more to say than on any other, and in which she
soon betrayed an interest even equal to his own; and in short, it
became speedily evident to both, that he had entirely supplanted his
brother. He was proud of his conquest, proud of tricking Edward, and
very proud of marrying privately without his mother's consent. What
immediately followed is known. They passed some months in great
happiness at Dawlish; for she had many relations and old acquaintances
to cut--and he drew several plans for magnificent cottages; and from
thence returning to town, procured the forgiveness of Mrs. Ferrars, by
the simple expedient of asking it, which, at Lucy's instigation, was
adopted. The forgiveness, at first, indeed, as was reasonable,
comprehended only Robert; and Lucy, who had owed his mother no duty
and therefore could have transgressed none, still remained some weeks
longer unpardoned. But perseverance in humility of conduct and
messages, in self-condemnation for Robert's offence, and gratitude for
the unkindness she was treated with, procured her in time the haughty
notice which overcame her by its graciousness, and led soon
afterwards, by rapid degrees, to the highest state of affection and
influence. Lucy became as necessary to Mrs. Ferrars, as either Robert
or Fanny; and while Edward was never cordially forgiven for having
once intended to marry her, and Elinor, though superior to her in
fortune and birth, was spoken of as an intruder, _she_ was in every
thing considered, and always openly acknowledged, to be a favourite
child. They settled in town, received very liberal assistance from
Mrs. Ferrars, were on the best terms imaginable with the Dashwoods;
and setting aside the jealousies and ill-will continually subsisting
between Fanny and Lucy, in which their husbands of course took a part,
as well as the frequent domestic disagreements between Robert and Lucy
themselves, nothing could exceed the harmony in which they all lived
together.

What Edward had done to forfeit the right of eldest son, might have
puzzled many people to find out; and what Robert had done to succeed
to it, might have puzzled them still more. It was an arrangement,
however, justified in its effects, if not in its cause; for nothing
ever appeared in Robert's style of living or of talking to give a
suspicion of his regretting the extent of his income, as either
leaving his brother too little, or bringing himself too much;--and if
Edward might be judged from the ready discharge of his duties in every
particular, from an increasing attachment to his wife and his home,
and from the regular cheerfulness of his spirits, he might be supposed
no less contented with his lot, no less free from every wish of an
exchange.

Elinor's marriage divided her as little from her family as could well
be contrived, without rendering the cottage at Barton entirely
useless, for her mother and sisters spent much more than half their
time with her. Mrs. Dashwood was acting on motives of policy as well
as pleasure in the frequency of her visits at Delaford; for her wish
of bringing Marianne and Colonel Brandon together was hardly less
earnest, though rather more liberal than what John had expressed. It
was now her darling object. Precious as was the company of her
daughter to her, she desired nothing so much as to give up its
constant enjoyment to her valued friend; and to see Marianne settled
at the mansion-house was equally the wish of Edward and Elinor. They
each felt his sorrows, and their own obligations, and Marianne, by
general consent, was to be the reward of all.

With such a confederacy against her--with a knowledge so intimate of
his goodness--with a conviction of his fond attachment to herself,
which at last, though long after it was observable to everybody
else--burst on her--what could she do?

Marianne Dashwood was born to an extraordinary fate. She was born to
discover the falsehood of her own opinions, and to counteract, by her
conduct, her most favourite maxims. She was born to overcome an
affection formed so late in life as at seventeen, and with no
sentiment superior to strong esteem and lively friendship, voluntarily
to give her hand to another!--and _that_ other, a man who had suffered
no less than herself under the event of a former attachment, whom, two
years before, she had considered too old to be married,--and who still
sought the constitutional safeguard of a flannel waistcoat!

But so it was. Instead of falling a sacrifice to an irresistible
passion, as once she had fondly flattered herself with expecting,
instead of remaining even for ever with her mother, and finding her
only pleasures in retirement and study, as afterwards in her more calm
and sober judgment she had determined on,--she found herself at
nineteen, submitting to new attachments, entering on new duties,
placed in a new home, a wife, the mistress of a family, and the
patroness of a village.

Colonel Brandon was now as happy, as all those who best loved him,
believed he deserved to be;--in Marianne he was consoled for every
past affliction;--her regard and her society restored his mind to
animation, and his spirits to cheerfulness; and that Marianne found
her own happiness in forming his, was equally the persuasion and
delight of each observing friend. Marianne could never love by halves;
and her whole heart became, in time, as much devoted to her husband,
as it had once been to Willoughby.

Willoughby could not hear of her marriage without a pang; and his
punishment was soon afterwards complete in the voluntary forgiveness
of Mrs. Smith, who, by stating his marriage with a woman of character,
as the source of her clemency, gave him reason for believing that had
he behaved with honour towards Marianne, he might at once have been
happy and rich. That his repentance of misconduct, which thus brought
its own punishment, was sincere, need not be doubted;--nor that he
long thought of Colonel Brandon with envy, and of Marianne with
regret. But that he was for ever inconsolable, that he fled from
society, or contracted an habitual gloom of temper, or died of a
broken heart, must not be depended on--for he did neither. He lived to
exert, and frequently to enjoy himself. His wife was not always out of
humour, nor his home always uncomfortable; and in his breed of horses
and dogs, and in sporting of every kind, he found no inconsiderable
degree of domestic felicity.

For Marianne, however, in spite of his incivility in surviving her
loss, he always retained that decided regard which interested him in
every thing that befell her, and made her his secret standard of
perfection in woman; and many a rising beauty would be slighted by him
in after-days as bearing no comparison with Mrs. Brandon.

Mrs. Dashwood was prudent enough to remain at the cottage, without
attempting a removal to Delaford; and fortunately for Sir John and
Mrs. Jennings, when Marianne was taken from them, Margaret had
reached an age highly suitable for dancing, and not very ineligible
for being supposed to have a lover.

Between Barton and Delaford, there was that constant communication
which strong family affection would naturally dictate;--and among the
merits and the happiness of Elinor and Marianne, let it not be ranked
as the least considerable, that though sisters, and living almost
within sight of each other, they could live without disagreement
between themselves, or producing coolness between their husbands.

THE END







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sense and Sensibility, by Jane Austen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SENSE AND SENSIBILITY ***

***** This file should be named 21839-8.txt or 21839-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/8/3/21839/

Produced by Fritz Ohrenschall and Sankar Viswanathan (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
