
"What a sweet woman Lady Middleton is!" said Lucy Steele.

Marianne was silent; it was impossible for her to say what she did not
feel, however trivial the occasion; and upon Elinor therefore the
whole task of telling lies when politeness required it, always fell.
She did her best when thus called on, by speaking of Lady Middleton
with more warmth than she felt, though with far less than Miss Lucy.

"And Sir John too," cried the elder sister, "what a charming man he
is!"

Here too, Miss Dashwood's commendation, being only simple and just,
came in without any Ã©clat. She merely observed that he was perfectly
good humoured and friendly.

"And what a charming little family they have! I never saw such fine
children in my life. I declare I quite doat upon them already, and
indeed I am always distractedly fond of children."

"I should guess so," said Elinor, with a smile, "from what I have
witnessed this morning."

"I have a notion," said Lucy, "you think the little Middletons rather
too much indulged; perhaps they may be the outside of enough; but it
is so natural in Lady Middleton; and for my part, I love to see
children full of life and spirits; I cannot bear them if they are tame
and quiet."

"I confess," replied Elinor, "that while I am at Barton Park, I never
think of tame and quiet children with any abhorrence."

A short pause succeeded this speech, which was first broken by Miss
Steele, who seemed very much disposed for conversation, and who now
said rather abruptly, "And how do you like Devonshire, Miss Dashwood?
I suppose you were very sorry to leave Sussex."

In some surprise at the familiarity of this question, or at least of
the manner in which it was spoken, Elinor replied that she was.

"Norland is a prodigious beautiful place, is not it?" added Miss
Steele.

"We have heard Sir John admire it excessively," said Lucy, who seemed
to think some apology necessary for the freedom of her sister.

"I think every one _must_ admire it," replied Elinor, "who ever saw
the place; though it is not to be supposed that any one can estimate
its beauties as we do."

"And had you a great many smart beaux there? I suppose you have not so
many in this part of the world; for my part, I think they are a vast
addition always."

"But why should you think," said Lucy, looking ashamed of her sister,
"that there are not as many genteel young men in Devonshire as
Sussex?"

"Nay, my dear, I'm sure I don't pretend to say that there an't. I'm
sure there's a vast many smart beaux in Exeter; but you know, how
could I tell what smart beaux there might be about Norland; and I was
only afraid the Miss Dashwoods might find it dull at Barton, if they
had not so many as they used to have. But perhaps you young ladies may
not care about the beaux, and had as lief be without them as with
them. For my part, I think they are vastly agreeable, provided they
dress smart and behave civil. But I can't bear to see them dirty and
nasty. Now there's Mr. Rose at Exeter, a prodigious smart young man,
quite a beau, clerk to Mr. Simpson, you know, and yet if you do but
meet him of a morning, he is not fit to be seen. I suppose your
brother was quite a beau, Miss Dashwood, before he married, as he was
so rich?"

"Upon my word," replied Elinor, "I cannot tell you, for I do not
perfectly comprehend the meaning of the word. But this I can say, that
if he ever was a beau before he married, he is one still for there is
not the smallest alteration in him."

"Oh! dear! one never thinks of married men's being beaux--they have
something else to do."

"Lord! Anne," cried her sister, "you can talk of nothing but
beaux;--you will make Miss Dashwood believe you think of nothing
else." And then to turn the discourse, she began admiring the house
and the furniture.

This specimen of the Miss Steeles was enough. The vulgar freedom and
folly of the eldest left her no recommendation, and as Elinor was not
blinded by the beauty, or the shrewd look of the youngest, to her want
of real elegance and artlessness, she left the house without any wish
of knowing them better.

Not so the Miss Steeles. They came from Exeter, well provided with
admiration for the use of Sir John Middleton, his family, and all his
relations, and no niggardly proportion was now dealt out to his fair
cousins, whom they declared to be the most beautiful, elegant,
accomplished, and agreeable girls they had ever beheld, and with whom
they were particularly anxious to be better acquainted. And to be
better acquainted therefore, Elinor soon found was their inevitable
lot, for as Sir John was entirely on the side of the Miss Steeles,
their party would be too strong for opposition, and that kind of
intimacy must be submitted to, which consists of sitting an hour or
two together in the same room almost every day. Sir John could do no
more; but he did not know that any more was required: to be together
was, in his opinion, to be intimate, and while his continual schemes
for their meeting were effectual, he had not a doubt of their being
established friends.

To do him justice, he did every thing in his power to promote their
unreserve, by making the Miss Steeles acquainted with whatever he knew
or supposed of his cousins' situations in the most delicate
particulars,--and Elinor had not seen them more than twice, before the
eldest of them wished her joy on her sister's having been so lucky as
to make a conquest of a very smart beau since she came to Barton.

"'Twill be a fine thing to have her married so young to be sure," said
she, "and I hear he is quite a beau, and prodigious handsome. And I
hope you may have as good luck yourself soon,--but perhaps you may
have a friend in the corner already."

Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be more nice in
proclaiming his suspicions of her regard for Edward, than he had been
with respect to Marianne; indeed it was rather his favourite joke of
the two, as being somewhat newer and more conjectural; and since
Edward's visit, they had never dined together without his drinking to
her best affections with so much significancy and so many nods and
winks, as to excite general attention. The letter F had been likewise
invariably brought forward, and found productive of such countless
jokes, that its character as the wittiest letter in the alphabet had
been long established with Elinor.

The Miss Steeles, as she expected, had now all the benefit of these
jokes, and in the eldest of them they raised a curiosity to know the
name of the gentleman alluded to, which, though often impertinently
expressed, was perfectly of a piece with her general inquisitiveness
into the concerns of their family. But Sir John did not sport long
with the curiosity which he delighted to raise, for he had at least as
much pleasure in telling the name, as Miss Steele had in hearing it.

"His name is Ferrars," said he, in a very audible whisper; "but pray
do not tell it, for it's a great secret."

[Illustration: _Drinking to her best affections._]

"Ferrars!" repeated Miss Steele; "Mr. Ferrars is the happy man, is he?
What! your sister-in-law's brother, Miss Dashwood? a very agreeable
young man to be sure; I know him very well."

"How can you say so, Anne?" cried Lucy, who generally made an
amendment to all her sister's assertions. "Though we have seen him
once or twice at my uncle's, it is rather too much to pretend to know
him very well."

Elinor heard all this with attention and surprise. "And who was this
uncle? Where did he live? How came they acquainted?" She wished very
much to have the subject continued, though she did not choose to join
in it herself; but nothing more of it was said, and for the first time
in her life, she thought Mrs. Jennings deficient either in curiosity
after petty information, or in a disposition to communicate it. The
manner in which Miss Steele had spoken of Edward, increased her
curiosity; for it struck her as being rather ill-natured, and
suggested the suspicion of that lady's knowing, or fancying herself to
know something to his disadvantage. But her curiosity was unavailing,
for no farther notice was taken of Mr. Ferrars's name by Miss Steele
when alluded to, or even openly mentioned by Sir John.




CHAPTER XXII


Marianne, who had never much toleration for any thing like
impertinence, vulgarity, inferiority of parts, or even difference of
taste from herself, was at this time particularly ill-disposed, from
the state of her spirits, to be pleased with the Miss Steeles, or to
encourage their advances; and to the invariable coldness of her
behaviour towards them, which checked every endeavour at intimacy on
their side, Elinor principally attributed that preference of herself
which soon became evident in the manners of both, but especially of
Lucy, who missed no opportunity of engaging her in conversation, or of
striving to improve their acquaintance by an easy and frank
communication of her sentiments.

Lucy was naturally clever; her remarks were often just and amusing;
and as a companion for half an hour Elinor frequently found her
agreeable; but her powers had received no aid from education: she was
ignorant and illiterate; and her deficiency of all mental improvement,
her want of information in the most common particulars, could not be
concealed from Miss Dashwood, in spite of her constant endeavour to
appear to advantage. Elinor saw, and pitied her for, the neglect of
abilities which education might have rendered so respectable; but she
saw, with less tenderness of feeling, the thorough want of delicacy,
of rectitude, and integrity of mind, which her attentions, her
assiduities, her flatteries at the Park betrayed; and she could have
no lasting satisfaction in the company of a person who joined
insincerity with ignorance; whose want of instruction prevented their
meeting in conversation on terms of equality, and whose conduct toward
others made every show of attention and deference towards herself
perfectly valueless.

"You will think my question an odd one, I dare say," said Lucy to her
one day, as they were walking together from the park to the
cottage--"but pray, are you personally acquainted with your
sister-in-law's mother, Mrs. Ferrars?"

Elinor _did_ think the question a very odd one, and her countenance
expressed it, as she answered that she had never seen Mrs. Ferrars.

"Indeed!" replied Lucy; "I wonder at that, for I thought you must have
seen her at Norland sometimes. Then, perhaps, you cannot tell me what
sort of a woman she is?"

"No," returned Elinor, cautious of giving her real opinion of Edward's
mother, and not very desirous of satisfying what seemed impertinent
curiosity; "I know nothing of her."

"I am sure you think me very strange, for enquiring about her in such
a way," said Lucy, eyeing Elinor attentively as she spoke; "but
perhaps there may be reasons--I wish I might venture; but however I
hope you will do me the justice of believing that I do not mean to be
impertinent."

Elinor made her a civil reply, and they walked on for a few minutes in
silence. It was broken by Lucy, who renewed the subject again by
saying, with some hesitation--

"I cannot bear to have you think me impertinently curious. I am sure I
would rather do any thing in the world than be thought so by a person
whose good opinion is so well worth having as yours. And I am sure I
should not have the smallest fear of trusting _you_; indeed, I should
be very glad of your advice how to manage in such and uncomfortable
situation as I am; but, however, there is no occasion to trouble
_you._ I am sorry you do not happen to know Mrs. Ferrars."

"I am sorry I do _not_," said Elinor, in great astonishment, "if it
could be of any use to _you_ to know my opinion of her. But really I
never understood that you were at all connected with that family, and
therefore I am a little surprised, I confess, at so serious an inquiry
into her character."

"I dare say you are, and I am sure I do not at all wonder at it. But
if I dared tell you all, you would not be so much surprised. Mrs.
Ferrars is certainly nothing to me at present--but the time _may_
come--how soon it will come must depend upon herself--when we may be
very intimately connected."

She looked down as she said this, amiably bashful, with only one side
glance at her companion to observe its effect on her.

"Good heavens!" cried Elinor, "what do you mean? Are you acquainted
with Mr. Robert Ferrars? Can you be?" And she did not feel much
delighted with the idea of such a sister-in-law.

"No," replied Lucy, "not to Mr. _Robert_ Ferrars--I never saw him in
my life; but," fixing her eyes upon Elinor, "to his eldest brother."

What felt Elinor at that moment? Astonishment, that would have been as
painful as it was strong, had not an immediate disbelief of the
assertion attended it. She turned towards Lucy in silent amazement,
unable to divine the reason or object of such a declaration; and
though her complexion varied, she stood firm in incredulity, and felt
in no danger of an hysterical fit, or a swoon.

"You may well be surprised," continued Lucy; "for to be sure you could
have had no idea of it before; for I dare say he never dropped the
smallest hint of it to you or any of your family; because it was
always meant to be a great secret, and I am sure has been faithfully
kept so by me to this hour. Not a soul of all my relations know of it
but Anne, and I never should have mentioned it to you, if I had not
felt the greatest dependence in the world upon your secrecy; and I
really thought my behaviour in asking so many questions about Mrs.
Ferrars must seem so odd, that it ought to be explained. And I do not
think Mr. Ferrars can be displeased, when he knows I have trusted
you, because I know he has the highest opinion in the world of all
your family, and looks upon yourself and the other Miss Dashwoods
quite as his own sisters."--She paused.

[Illustration: _Amiably bashful._]

Elinor for a few moments remained silent. Her astonishment at what she
heard was at first too great for words; but at length forcing herself
to speak, and to speak cautiously, she said, with calmness of manner,
which tolerably well concealed her surprise and solicitude--"May I ask
if your engagement is of long standing?"

"We have been engaged these four years."

"Four years!"

"Yes."

Elinor, though greatly shocked, still felt unable to believe it.

"I did not know," said she, "that you were even acquainted till the
other day."

"Our acquaintance, however, is of many years date. He was under my
uncle's care, you know, a considerable while."

"Your uncle!"

"Yes; Mr. Pratt. Did you never hear him talk of Mr. Pratt?"

"I think I have," replied Elinor, with an exertion of spirits, which
increased with her increase of emotion.

"He was four years with my uncle, who lives at Longstaple, near
Plymouth. It was there our acquaintance begun, for my sister and me
was often staying with my uncle, and it was there our engagement was
formed, though not till a year after he had quitted as a pupil; but he
was almost always with us afterwards. I was very unwilling to enter
into it, as you may imagine, without the knowledge and approbation of
his mother; but I was too young, and loved him too well, to be so
prudent as I ought to have been. Though you do not know him so well as
me, Miss Dashwood, you must have seen enough of him to be sensible he
is very capable of making a woman sincerely attached to him."

"Certainly," answered Elinor, without knowing what she said; but after
a moment's reflection, she added, with revived security of Edward's
honour and love, and her companion's falsehood--"Engaged to Mr. Edward
Ferrars!--I confess myself so totally surprised at what you tell me,
that really--I beg your pardon; but surely there must be some mistake
of person or name. We cannot mean the same Mr. Ferrars."

"We can mean no other," cried Lucy, smiling. "Mr. Edward Ferrars, the
eldest son of Mrs. Ferrars, of Park Street, and brother of your
sister-in-law, Mrs. John Dashwood, is the person I mean; you must
allow that I am not likely to be deceived as to the name of the man on
who all my happiness depends."

"It is strange," replied Elinor, in a most painful perplexity, "that I
should never have heard him even mention your name."

"No; considering our situation, it was not strange. Our first care has
been to keep the matter secret. You knew nothing of me, or my family,
and, therefore, there could be no _occasion_ for ever mentioning my
name to you; and, as he was always particularly afraid of his sister's
suspecting any thing, _that_ was reason enough for his not mentioning
it."

She was silent. Elinor's security sunk; but her self-command did not
sink with it.

"Four years you have been engaged," said she with a firm voice.

"Yes; and heaven knows how much longer we may have to wait. Poor
Edward! It puts him quite out of heart." Then taking a small miniature
from her pocket, she added, "To prevent the possibility of mistake, be
so good as to look at this face. It does not do him justice, to be
sure, but yet I think you cannot be deceived as to the person it was
drew for. I have had it above these three years."

She put it into her hands as she spoke; and when Elinor saw the
painting, whatever other doubts her fear of a too hasty decision, or
her wish of detecting falsehood might suffer to linger in her mind,
she could have none of its being Edward's face. She returned it almost
instantly, acknowledging the likeness.

"I have never been able," continued Lucy, "to give him my picture in
return, which I am very much vexed at, for he has been always so
anxious to get it! But I am determined to set for it the very first
opportunity."

"You are quite in the right," replied Elinor calmly. They then
proceeded a few paces in silence. Lucy spoke first.

"I am sure," said she, "I have no doubt in the world of your
faithfully keeping this secret, because you must know of what
importance it is to us, not to have it reach his mother; for she
would never approve of it, I dare say. I shall have no fortune, and I
fancy she is an exceeding proud woman."

"I certainly did not seek your confidence," said Elinor; "but you do
me no more than justice in imagining that I may be depended on. Your
secret is safe with me; but pardon me if I express some surprise at so
unnecessary a communication. You must at least have felt that my being
acquainted with it could not add to its safety."

As she said this, she looked earnestly at Lucy, hoping to discover
something in her countenance; perhaps the falsehood of the greatest
part of what she had been saying; but Lucy's countenance suffered no
change.

"I was afraid you would think I was taking a great liberty with you,"
said she, "in telling you all this. I have not known you long to be
sure, personally at least, but I have known you and all your family by
description a great while; and as soon as I saw you, I felt almost as
if you was an old acquaintance. Besides in the present case, I really
thought some explanation was due to you after my making such
particular inquiries about Edward's mother; and I am so unfortunate,
that I have not a creature whose advice I can ask. Anne is the only
person that knows of it, and she has no judgment at all; indeed, she
does me a great deal more harm than good, for I am in constant fear of
her betraying me. She does not know how to hold her tongue, as you
must perceive, and I am sure I was in the greatest fright in the world
t'other day, when Edward's name was mentioned by Sir John, lest she
should out with it all. You can't think how much I go through in my
mind from it altogether. I only wonder that I am alive after what I
have suffered for Edward's sake these last four years. Every thing in
such suspense and uncertainty; and seeing him so seldom--we can hardly
meet above twice a-year. I am sure I wonder my heart is not quite
broke."

Here she took out her handkerchief; but Elinor did not feel very
compassionate.

"Sometimes," continued Lucy, after wiping her eyes, "I think whether
it would not be better for us both to break off the matter entirely."
As she said this, she looked directly at her companion. "But then at
other times I have not resolution enough for it. I cannot bear the
thoughts of making him so miserable, as I know the very mention of
such a thing would do. And on my own account too--so dear as he is to
me--I don't think I could be equal to it. What would you advise me to
do in such a case, Miss Dashwood? What would you do yourself?"

"Pardon me," replied Elinor, startled by the question; "but I can give
you no advice under such circumstances. Your own judgment must direct
you."

"To be sure," continued Lucy, after a few minutes silence on both
sides, "his mother must provide for him sometime or other; but poor
Edward is so cast down by it! Did you not think him dreadful
low-spirited when he was at Barton? He was so miserable when he left
us at Longstaple, to go to you, that I was afraid you would think him
quite ill."

"Did he come from your uncle's, then, when he visited us?"

"Oh, yes; he had been staying a fortnight with us. Did you think he
came directly from town?"

"No," replied Elinor, most feelingly sensible of every fresh
circumstance in favour of Lucy's veracity; "I remember he told us,
that he had been staying a fortnight with some friends near Plymouth."
She remembered too, her own surprise at the time, at his mentioning
nothing farther of those friends, at his total silence with respect
even to their names.

"Did not you think him sadly out of spirits?" repeated Lucy.

"We did, indeed, particularly so when he first arrived."

"I begged him to exert himself for fear you should suspect what was
the matter; but it made him so melancholy, not being able to stay more
than a fortnight with us, and seeing me so much affected. Poor
fellow!--I am afraid it is just the same with him now; for he writes
in wretched spirits. I heard from him just before I left Exeter;"
taking a letter from her pocket and carelessly showing the direction
to Elinor. "You know his hand, I dare say, a charming one it is; but
that is not written so well as usual. He was tired, I dare say, for he
had just filled the sheet to me as full as possible."

Elinor saw that it _was_ his hand, and she could doubt no longer. This
picture, she had allowed herself to believe, might have been
accidentally obtained; it might not have been Edward's gift; but a
correspondence between them by letter, could subsist only under a
positive engagement, could be authorised by nothing else; for a few
moments, she was almost overcome--her heart sunk within her, and she
could hardly stand; but exertion was indispensably necessary; and she
struggled so resolutely against the oppression of her feelings, that
her success was speedy, and for the time complete.

"Writing to each other," said Lucy, returning the letter into her
pocket, "is the only comfort we have in such long separations. Yes, I
have one other comfort in his picture, but poor Edward has not even
_that._ If he had but my picture, he says he should be easy. I gave
him a lock of my hair set in a ring when he was at Longstaple last,
and that was some comfort to him, he said, but not equal to a picture.
Perhaps you might notice the ring when you saw him?"

"I did," said Elinor, with a composure of voice, under which was
concealed an emotion and distress beyond any thing she had ever felt
before. She was mortified, shocked, confounded.

Fortunately for her, they had now reached the cottage, and the
conversation could be continued no farther. After sitting with them a
few minutes, the Miss Steeles returned to the Park, and Elinor was
then at liberty to think and be wretched.




CHAPTER XXIII


However small Elinor's general dependence on Lucy's veracity might be,
it was impossible for her on serious reflection to suspect it in the
present case, where no temptation could be answerable to the folly of
inventing a falsehood of such a description. What Lucy had asserted to
be true, therefore, Elinor could not, dared not longer doubt;
supported as it was too on every side by such probabilities and
proofs, and contradicted by nothing but her own wishes. Their
opportunity of acquaintance in the house of Mr. Pratt was a foundation
for the rest, at once indisputable and alarming; and Edward's visit
near Plymouth, his melancholy state of mind, his dissatisfaction at
his own prospects, his uncertain behaviour towards herself, the
intimate knowledge of the Miss Steeles as to Norland and their family
connections, which had often surprised her, the picture, the letter,
the ring, formed altogether such a body of evidence, as overcame
every fear of condemning him unfairly, and established as a fact,
which no partiality could set aside, his ill-treatment of herself. Her
resentment of such behaviour, her indignation at having been its dupe,
for a short time made her feel only for herself; but other ideas,
other considerations, soon arose. Had Edward been intentionally
deceiving her? Had he feigned a regard for her which he did not feel?
Was his engagement to Lucy an engagement of the heart? No; whatever it
might once have been, she could not believe it such at present. His
affection was all her own. She could not be deceived in that. Her
mother, sisters, Fanny, all had been conscious of his regard for her
at Norland; it was not an illusion of her own vanity. He certainly
loved her. What a softener of the heart was this persuasion! How much
could it not tempt her to forgive! He had been blamable, highly
blamable, in remaining at Norland after he first felt her influence
over him to be more than it ought to be. In that, he could not be
defended; but if he had injured her, how much more had he injured
himself; if her case were pitiable, his was hopeless. His imprudence
had made her miserable for a while; but it seemed to have deprived
himself of all chance of ever being otherwise. She might in time
regain tranquillity; but _he_, what had he to look forward to? Could
he ever be tolerably happy with Lucy Steele; could he, were his
affection for herself out of the question, with his integrity, his
delicacy, and well-informed mind, be satisfied with a wife like
her--illiterate, artful, and selfish?

The youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturally blind him to
every thing but her beauty and good nature; but the four succeeding
years--years, which if rationally spent, give such improvement to the
understanding, must have opened his eyes to her defects of education,
while the same period of time, spent on her side in inferior society
and more frivolous pursuits, had perhaps robbed her of that simplicity
which might once have given an interesting character to her beauty.

If in the supposition of his seeking to marry herself, his
difficulties from his mother had seemed great, how much greater were
they now likely to be, when the object of his engagement was
undoubtedly inferior in connections, and probably inferior in fortune
to herself. These difficulties, indeed, with a heart so alienated
from Lucy, might not press very hard upon his patience; but melancholy
was the state of the person by whom the expectation of family
opposition and unkindness, could be felt as a relief!

As these considerations occurred to her in painful succession, she
wept for him, more than for herself. Supported by the conviction of
having done nothing to merit her present unhappiness, and consoled by
the belief that Edward had done nothing to forfeit her esteem, she
thought she could even now, under the first smart of the heavy blow,
command herself enough to guard every suspicion of the truth from her
mother and sisters. And so well was she able to answer her own
expectations, that when she joined them at dinner only two hours after
she had first suffered the extinction of all her dearest hopes, no one
would have supposed from the appearance of the sisters, that Elinor
was mourning in secret over obstacles which must divide her for ever
from the object of her love, and that Marianne was internally dwelling
on the perfections of a man, of whose whole heart she felt thoroughly
possessed, and whom she expected to see in every carriage which drove
near their house.

The necessity of concealing from her mother and Marianne, what had
been entrusted in confidence to herself, though it obliged her to
unceasing exertion, was no aggravation of Elinor's distress. On the
contrary it was a relief to her, to be spared the communication of
what would give such affliction to them, and to be saved likewise from
hearing that condemnation of Edward, which would probably flow from
the excess of their partial affection for herself, and which was more
than she felt equal to support.

From their counsel, or their conversation, she knew she could receive
no assistance, their tenderness and sorrow must add to her distress,
while her self-command would neither receive encouragement from their
example nor from their praise. She was stronger alone, and her own
good sense so well supported her, that her firmness was as unshaken,
her appearance of cheerfulness as invariable, as with regrets so
poignant and so fresh, it was possible for them to be.

Much as she had suffered from her first conversation with Lucy on the
subject, she soon felt an earnest wish of renewing it; and this for
more reasons than one. She wanted to hear many particulars of their
engagement repeated again, she wanted more clearly to understand what
Lucy really felt for Edward, whether there were any sincerity in her
declaration of tender regard for him, and she particularly wanted to
convince Lucy, by her readiness to enter on the matter again, and her
calmness in conversing on it, that she was no otherwise interested in
it than as a friend, which she very much feared her involuntary
agitation, in their morning discourse, must have left at least
doubtful. That Lucy was disposed to be jealous of her appeared very
probable: it was plain that Edward had always spoken highly in her
praise, not merely from Lucy's assertion, but from her venturing to
trust her on so short a personal acquaintance, with a secret so
confessedly and evidently important. And even Sir John's joking
intelligence must have had some weight. But indeed, while Elinor
remained so well assured within herself of being really beloved by
Edward, it required no other consideration of probabilities to make it
natural that Lucy should be jealous; and that she was so, her very
confidence was a proof. What other reason for the disclosure of the
affair could there be, but that Elinor might be informed by it of
Lucy's superior claims on Edward, and be taught to avoid him in
future? She had little difficulty in understanding thus much of her
rival's intentions, and while she was firmly resolved to act by her as
every principle of honour and honesty directed, to combat her own
affection for Edward and to see him as little as possible; she could
not deny herself the comfort of endeavouring to convince Lucy that her
heart was unwounded. And as she could now have nothing more painful to
hear on the subject than had already been told, she did not mistrust
her own ability of going through a repetition of particulars with
composure.

But it was not immediately that an opportunity of doing so could be
commanded, though Lucy was as well disposed as herself to take
advantage of any that occurred; for the weather was not often fine
enough to allow of their joining in a walk, where they might most
easily separate themselves from the others; and though they met at
least every other evening either at the park or cottage, and chiefly
at the former, they could not be supposed to meet for the sake of
conversation. Such a thought would never enter either Sir John or
Lady Middleton's head; and therefore very little leisure was ever
given for a general chat, and none at all for particular discourse.
They met for the sake of eating, drinking, and laughing together,
playing at cards, or consequences, or any other game that was
sufficiently noisy.

One or two meetings of this kind had taken place, without affording
Elinor any chance of engaging Lucy in private, when Sir John called at
the cottage one morning, to beg, in the name of charity, that they
would all dine with Lady Middleton that day, as he was obliged to
attend the club at Exeter, and she would otherwise be quite alone,
except her mother and the two Miss Steeles. Elinor, who foresaw a
fairer opening for the point she had in view, in such a party as this
was likely to be, more at liberty among themselves under the tranquil
and well-bred direction of Lady Middleton than when her husband united
them together in one noisy purpose, immediately accepted the
invitation; Margaret, with her mother's permission, was equally
compliant, and Marianne, though always unwilling to join any of their
parties, was persuaded by her mother, who could not bear to have her
seclude herself from any chance of amusement, to go likewise.

The young ladies went, and Lady Middleton was happily preserved from
the frightful solitude which had threatened her. The insipidity of the
meeting was exactly such as Elinor had expected; it produced not one
novelty of thought or expression, and nothing could be less
interesting than the whole of their discourse both in the dining
parlour and drawing room: to the latter, the children accompanied
them, and while they remained there, she was too well convinced of the
impossibility of engaging Lucy's attention to attempt it. They quitted
it only with the removal of the tea-things. The card-table was then
placed, and Elinor began to wonder at herself for having ever
entertained a hope of finding time for conversation at the park. They
all rose up in preparation for a round game.

"I am glad," said Lady Middleton to Lucy, "you are not going to finish
poor little Annamaria's basket this evening; for I am sure it must
hurt your eyes to work filigree by candlelight. And we will make the
dear little love some amends for her disappointment to-morrow, and
then I hope she will not much mind it."

This hint was enough, Lucy recollected herself instantly and replied,
"Indeed you are very much mistaken, Lady Middleton; I am only waiting
to know whether you can make your party without me, or I should have
been at my filigree already. I would not disappoint the little angel
for all the world: and if you want me at the card-table now, I am
resolved to finish the basket after supper."

"You are very good, I hope it won't hurt your eyes:--will you ring the
bell for some working candles? My poor little girl would be sadly
disappointed, I know, if the basket was not finished tomorrow, for
though I told her it certainly would not, I am sure she depends upon
having it done."

Lucy directly drew her work table near her and reseated herself with
an alacrity and cheerfulness which seemed to infer that she could
taste no greater delight than in making a filigree basket for a spoilt
child.

Lady Middleton proposed a rubber of Casino to the others. No one made
any objection but Marianne, who with her usual inattention to the
forms of general civility, exclaimed, "Your Ladyship will have the
goodness to excuse _me_--you know I detest cards. I shall go to the
piano-forte; I have not touched it since it was tuned." And without
farther ceremony, she turned away and walked to the instrument.

Lady Middleton looked as if she thanked heaven that _she_ had never
made so rude a speech.

"Marianne can never keep long from that instrument you know, ma'am,"
said Elinor, endeavouring to smooth away the offence; "and I do not
much wonder at it; for it is the very best toned piano-forte I ever
heard."

The remaining five were now to draw their cards.

"Perhaps," continued Elinor, "if I should happen to cut out, I may be
of some use to Miss Lucy Steele, in rolling her papers for her; and
there is so much still to be done to the basket, that it must be
impossible I think for her labour singly, to finish it this evening. I
should like the work exceedingly, if she would allow me a share in
it."

"Indeed I shall be very much obliged to you for your help," cried
Lucy, "for I find there is more to be done to it than I thought there
was; and it would be a shocking thing to disappoint dear Annamaria
after all."

"Oh! that would be terrible, indeed," said Miss Steele. "Dear little
soul, how I do love her!"

"You are very kind," said Lady Middleton to Elinor; "and as you
really like the work, perhaps you will be as well pleased not to cut
in till another rubber, or will you take your chance now?"

Elinor joyfully profited by the first of these proposals, and thus by
a little of that address which Marianne could never condescend to
practise, gained her own end, and pleased Lady Middleton at the same
time. Lucy made room for her with ready attention, and the two fair
rivals were thus seated side by side at the same table, and, with the
utmost harmony, engaged in forwarding the same work. The pianoforte at
which Marianne, wrapped up in her own music and her own thoughts, had
by this time forgotten that any body was in the room besides herself,
was luckily so near them that Miss Dashwood now judged she might
safely, under the shelter of its noise, introduce the interesting
subject, without any risk of being heard at the card-table.




CHAPTER XXIV


In a firm, though cautious tone, Elinor thus began.

"I should be undeserving of the confidence you have honoured me with,
if I felt no desire for its continuance, or no farther curiosity on
its subject. I will not apologize therefore for bringing it forward
again."

"Thank you," cried Lucy warmly, "for breaking the ice; you have set my
heart at ease by it; for I was somehow or other afraid I had offended
you by what I told you that Monday."

"Offended me! How could you suppose so? Believe me," and Elinor spoke
it with the truest sincerity, "nothing could be farther from my
intention than to give you such an idea. Could you have a motive for
the trust, that was not honourable and flattering to me?"

"And yet I do assure you," replied Lucy, her little sharp eyes full of
meaning, "there seemed to me to be a coldness and displeasure in your
manner that made me quite uncomfortable. I felt sure that you was
angry with me; and have been quarrelling with myself ever since, for
having took such a liberty as to trouble you with my affairs. But I am
very glad to find it was only my own fancy, and that you really do not
blame me. If you knew what a consolation it was to me to relieve my
heart speaking to you of what I am always thinking of every moment of
my life, your compassion would make you overlook every thing else I am
sure."

"Indeed, I can easily believe that it was a very great relief to you,
to acknowledge your situation to me, and be assured that you shall
never have reason to repent it. Your case is a very unfortunate one;
you seem to me to be surrounded with difficulties, and you will have
need of all your mutual affection to support you under them. Mr.
Ferrars, I believe, is entirely dependent on his mother."

"He has only two thousand pounds of his own; it would be madness to
marry upon that, though for my own part, I could give up every
prospect of more without a sigh. I have been always used to a very
small income, and could struggle with any poverty for him; but I love
him too well to be the selfish means of robbing him, perhaps, of all
that his mother might give him if he married to please her. We must
wait, it may be for many years. With almost every other man in the
world, it would be an alarming prospect; but Edward's affection and
constancy nothing can deprive me of I know."

"That conviction must be every thing to you; and he is undoubtedly
supported by the same trust in your's. If the strength of your
reciprocal attachment had failed, as between many people, and under
many circumstances it naturally would during a four years' engagement,
your situation would have been pitiable, indeed."

Lucy here looked up; but Elinor was careful in guarding her
countenance from every expression that could give her words a
suspicious tendency.

"Edward's love for me," said Lucy, "has been pretty well put to the
test, by our long, very long absence since we were first engaged, and
it has stood the trial so well, that I should be unpardonable to doubt
it now. I can safely say that he has never gave me one moment's alarm
on that account from the first."

Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or sigh at this assertion.

Lucy went on. "I am rather of a jealous temper too by nature, and from
our different situations in life, from his being so much more in the
world than me, and our continual separation, I was enough inclined for
suspicion, to have found out the truth in an instant, if there had
been the slightest alteration in his behaviour to me when we met, or
any lowness of spirits that I could not account for, or if he had
talked more of one lady than another, or seemed in any respect less
happy at Longstaple than he used to be. I do not mean to say that I am
particularly observant or quick-sighted in general, but in such a case
I am sure I could not be deceived."

"All this," thought Elinor, "is very pretty; but it can impose upon
neither of us."

"But what," said she after a short silence, "are your views? or have
you none but that of waiting for Mrs. Ferrars's death, which is a
melancholy and shocking extremity?--Is her son determined to submit to
this, and to all the tediousness of the many years of suspense in
which it may involve you, rather than run the risk of her displeasure
for a while by owning the truth?"

"If we could be certain that it would be only for a while! But Mrs.
Ferrars is a very headstrong proud woman, and in her first fit of
anger upon hearing it, would very likely secure every thing to Robert,
and the idea of that, for Edward's sake, frightens away all my
inclination for hasty measures."

"And for your own sake too, or you are carrying your disinterestedness
beyond reason."

Lucy looked at Elinor again, and was silent.

"Do you know Mr. Robert Ferrars?" asked Elinor.

"Not at all--I never saw him; but I fancy he is very unlike his
brother--silly and a great coxcomb."

"A great coxcomb!" repeated Miss Steele, whose ear had caught those
words by a sudden pause in Marianne's music. "Oh, they are talking of
their favourite beaux, I dare say."

"No sister," cried Lucy, "you are mistaken there, our favourite beaux
are _not_ great coxcombs."

"I can answer for it that Miss Dashwood's is not," said Mrs. Jennings,
laughing heartily; "for he is one of the modestest, prettiest behaved
young men I ever saw; but as for Lucy, she is such a sly little
creature, there is no finding out who _she_ likes."

[Illustration: "_I can answer for it," said Mrs. Jennings._]

"Oh," cried Miss Steele, looking significantly round at them, "I dare
say Lucy's beau is quite as modest and pretty behaved as Miss
Dashwood's."

Elinor blushed in spite of herself. Lucy bit her lip, and looked
angrily at her sister. A mutual silence took place for some time. Lucy
first put an end to it by saying in a lower tone, though Marianne was
then giving them the powerful protection of a very magnificent
concerto--

"I will honestly tell you of one scheme which has lately come into my
head, for bringing matters to bear; indeed I am bound to let you into
the secret, for you are a party concerned. I dare say you have seen
enough of Edward to know that he would prefer the church to every
other profession; now my plan is that he should take orders as soon as
he can, and then through your interest, which I am sure you would be
kind enough to use out of friendship for him, and I hope out of some
regard to me, your brother might be persuaded to give him Norland
living; which I understand is a very good one, and the present
incumbent not likely to live a great while. That would be enough for
us to marry upon, and we might trust to time and chance for the rest."

"I should always be happy," replied Elinor, "to show any mark of my
esteem and friendship for Mr. Ferrars; but do you not perceive that my
interest on such an occasion would be perfectly unnecessary? He is
brother to Mrs. John Dashwood--_that_ must be recommendation enough to
her husband."

"But Mrs. John Dashwood would not much approve of Edward's going into
orders."

"Then I rather suspect that my interest would do very little."

They were again silent for many minutes. At length Lucy exclaimed with
a deep sigh--

"I believe it would be the wisest way to put an end to the business at
once by dissolving the engagement. We seem so beset with difficulties
on every side, that though it would make us miserable for a time, we
should be happier perhaps in the end. But you will not give me your
advice, Miss Dashwood?"

"No," answered Elinor, with a smile, which concealed very agitated
feelings, "on such a subject I certainly will not. You know very well
that my opinion would have no weight with you, unless it were on the
side of your wishes."

"Indeed you wrong me," replied Lucy, with great solemnity; "I know
nobody of whose judgment I think so highly as I do of yours; and I do
really believe, that if you was to say to me, 'I advise you by all
means to put an end to your engagement with Edward Ferrars, it will be
more for the happiness of both of you,' I should resolve upon doing it
immediately."

Elinor blushed for the insincerity of Edward's future wife, and
replied, "This compliment would effectually frighten me from giving
any opinion on the subject had I formed one. It raises my influence
much too high; the power of dividing two people so tenderly attached
is too much for an indifferent person."

"'Tis because you are an indifferent person," said Lucy, with some
pique, and laying a particular stress on those words, "that your
judgment might justly have such weight with me. If you could be
supposed to be biased in any respect by your own feelings, your
opinion would not be worth having."

Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this, lest they might
provoke each other to an unsuitable increase of ease and unreserve;
and was even partly determined never to mention the subject again.
Another pause therefore of many minutes' duration, succeeded this
speech, and Lucy was still the first to end it.

"Shall you be in town this winter, Miss Dashwood?" said she with all
her accustomary complacency.

"Certainly not."

"I am sorry for that," returned the other, while her eyes brightened
at the information, "it would have gave me such pleasure to meet you
there! But I dare say you will go for all that. To be sure, your
brother and sister will ask you to come to them."

"It will not be in my power to accept their invitation if they do."

"How unlucky that is! I had quite depended upon meeting you there.
Anne and me are to go the latter end of January to some relations who
have been wanting us to visit them these several years! But I only go
for the sake of seeing Edward. He will be there in February, otherwise
London would have no charms for me; I have not spirits for it."

Elinor was soon called to the card-table by the conclusion of the
first rubber, and the confidential discourse of the two ladies was
therefore at an end, to which both of them submitted without any
reluctance, for nothing had been said on either side to make them
dislike each other less than they had done before; and Elinor sat down
to the card table with the melancholy persuasion that Edward was not
only without affection for the person who was to be his wife; but that
he had not even the chance of being tolerably happy in marriage, which
sincere affection on _her_ side would have given, for self-interest
alone could induce a woman to keep a man to an engagement, of which
she seemed so thoroughly aware that he was weary.

From this time the subject was never revived by Elinor, and when
entered on by Lucy, who seldom missed an opportunity of introducing
it, and was particularly careful to inform her confidante, of her
happiness whenever she received a letter from Edward, it was treated
by the former with calmness and caution, and dismissed as soon as
civility would allow; for she felt such conversations to be an
indulgence which Lucy did not deserve, and which were dangerous to
herself.

The visit of the Miss Steeles at Barton Park was lengthened far beyond
what the first invitation implied. Their favour increased; they could
not be spared; Sir John would not hear of their going; and in spite of
their numerous and long arranged engagements in Exeter, in spite of
the absolute necessity of returning to fulfill them immediately, which
was in full force at the end of every week, they were prevailed on to
stay nearly two months at the park, and to assist in the due
celebration of that festival which requires a more than ordinary share
of private balls and large dinners to proclaim its importance.




CHAPTER XXV


Though Mrs. Jennings was in the habit of spending a large portion of
the year at the houses of her children and friends, she was not
without a settled habitation of her own. Since the death of her
husband, who had traded with success in a less elegant part of the
town, she had resided every winter in a house in one of the streets
near Portman Square. Towards this home, she began on the approach of
January to turn her thoughts, and thither she one day abruptly, and
very unexpectedly by them, asked the elder Misses Dashwood to
accompany her. Elinor, without observing the varying complexion of her
sister, and the animated look which spoke no indifference to the plan,
immediately gave a grateful but absolute denial for both, in which she
believed herself to be speaking their united inclinations. The reason
alleged was their determined resolution of not leaving their mother at
that time of the year. Mrs. Jennings received the refusal with some
surprise, and repeated her invitation immediately.

"Oh, Lord! I am sure your mother can spare you very well, and I _do_
beg you will favour me with your company, for I've quite set my heart
upon it. Don't fancy that you will be any inconvenience to me, for I
shan't put myself at all out of my way for you. It will only be
sending Betty by the coach, and I hope I can afford _that._ We three
shall be able to go very well in my chaise; and when we are in town,
if you do not like to go wherever I do, well and good, you may always
go with one of my daughters. I am sure your mother will not object to
it; for I have had such good luck in getting my own children off my
hands that she will think me a very fit person to have the charge of
you; and if I don't get one of you at least well married before I have
done with you, it shall not be my fault. I shall speak a good word for
you to all the young men, you may depend upon it."

"I have a notion," said Sir John, "that Miss Marianne would not object
to such a scheme, if her elder sister would come into it. It is very
hard indeed that she should not have a little pleasure, because Miss
Dashwood does not wish it. So I would advise you two, to set off for
town, when you are tired of Barton, without saying a word to Miss
Dashwood about it."

"Nay," cried Mrs. Jennings, "I am sure I shall be monstrous glad of
Miss Marianne's company, whether Miss Dashwood will go or not, only
the more the merrier say I, and I thought it would be more comfortable
for them to be together; because, if they got tired of me, they might
talk to one another, and laugh at my old ways behind my back. But one
or the other, if not both of them, I must have. Lord bless me! how do
you think I can live poking by myself, I who have been always used
till this winter to have Charlotte with me. Come, Miss Marianne, let
us strike hands upon the bargain, and if Miss Dashwood will change her
mind by and bye, why so much the better."

"I thank you, ma'am, sincerely thank you," said Marianne, with warmth:
"your invitation has insured my gratitude for ever, and it would give
me such happiness, yes, almost the greatest happiness I am capable of,
to be able to accept it. But my mother, my dearest, kindest mother,--I
feel the justice of what Elinor has urged, and if she were to be made
less happy, less comfortable by our absence--Oh! no, nothing should
tempt me to leave her. It should not, must not be a struggle."

Mrs. Jennings repeated her assurance that Mrs. Dashwood could spare
them perfectly well; and Elinor, who now understood her sister, and
saw to what indifference to almost every thing else she was carried by
her eagerness to be with Willoughby again, made no farther direct
opposition to the plan, and merely referred it to her mother's
decision, from whom however she scarcely expected to receive any
support in her endeavour to prevent a visit, which she could not
approve of for Marianne, and which on her own account she had
particular reasons to avoid. Whatever Marianne was desirous of, her
mother would be eager to promote--she could not expect to influence
the latter to cautiousness of conduct in an affair respecting which
she had never been able to inspire her with distrust; and she dared
not explain the motive of her own disinclination for going to London.
That Marianne, fastidious as she was, thoroughly acquainted with Mrs.
Jennings' manners, and invariably disgusted by them, should overlook
every inconvenience of that kind, should disregard whatever must be
most wounding to her irritable feelings, in her pursuit of one object,
was such a proof, so strong, so full, of the importance of that object
to her, as Elinor, in spite of all that had passed, was not prepared
to witness.

On being informed of the invitation, Mrs. Dashwood, persuaded that
such an excursion would be productive of much amusement to both her
daughters, and perceiving through all her affectionate attention to
herself, how much the heart of Marianne was in it, would not hear of
their declining the offer upon _her_ account; insisted on their both
accepting it directly; and then began to foresee, with her usual
cheerfulness, a variety of advantages that would accrue to them all,
from this separation.

"I am delighted with the plan," she cried, "it is exactly what I could
wish. Margaret and I shall be as much benefited by it as yourselves.
When you and the Middletons are gone, we shall go on so quietly and
happily together with our books and our music! You will find Margaret
so improved when you come back again! I have a little plan of
alteration for your bedrooms too, which may now be performed without
any inconvenience to any one. It is very right that you _should_ go to
town; I would have every young woman of your condition in life
acquainted with the manners and amusements of London. You will be
under the care of a motherly good sort of woman, of whose kindness to
you I can have no doubt. And in all probability you will see your
brother, and whatever may be his faults, or the faults of his wife,
when I consider whose son he is, I cannot bear to have you so wholly
estranged from each other."

"Though with your usual anxiety for our happiness," said Elinor, "you
have been obviating every impediment to the present scheme which
occurred to you, there is still one objection which, in my opinion,
cannot be so easily removed."

Marianne's countenance sunk.

"And what," said Mrs. Dashwood, "is my dear prudent Elinor going to
suggest? What formidable obstacle is she now to bring forward? Do let
me hear a word about the expense of it."

"My objection is this; though I think very well of Mrs. Jennings's
heart, she is not a woman whose society can afford us pleasure, or
whose protection will give us consequence."

"That is very true," replied her mother, "but of her society,
separately from that of other people, you will scarcely have any thing
at all, and you will almost always appear in public with Lady
Middleton."

"If Elinor is frightened away by her dislike of Mrs. Jennings," said
Marianne, "at least it need not prevent _my_ accepting her invitation.
I have no such scruples, and I am sure I could put up with every
unpleasantness of that kind with very little effort."

Elinor could not help smiling at this display of indifference towards
the manners of a person, to whom she had often had difficulty in
persuading Marianne to behave with tolerable politeness; and resolved
within herself, that if her sister persisted in going, she would go
likewise, as she did not think it proper that Marianne should be left
to the sole guidance of her own judgment, or that Mrs. Jennings should
be abandoned to the mercy of Marianne for all the comfort of her
domestic hours. To this determination she was the more easily
reconciled, by recollecting that Edward Ferrars, by Lucy's account,
was not to be in town before February; and that their visit, without
any unreasonable abridgement, might be previously finished.

"I will have you _both_ go," said Mrs. Dashwood; "these objections are
nonsensical. You will have much pleasure in being in London, and
especially in being together; and if Elinor would ever condescend to
anticipate enjoyment, she would foresee it there from a variety of
sources; she would, perhaps, expect some from improving her
acquaintance with her sister-in-law's family."

Elinor had often wished for an opportunity of attempting to weaken her
mother's dependence on the attachment of Edward and herself, that the
shock might be less when the whole truth were revealed, and now on
this attack, though almost hopeless of success, she forced herself to
begin her design by saying, as calmly as she could, "I like Edward
Ferrars very much, and shall always be glad to see him; but as to the
rest of the family, it is a matter of perfect indifference to me,
whether I am ever known to them or not."

Mrs. Dashwood smiled, and said nothing. Marianne lifted up her eyes in
astonishment, and Elinor conjectured that she might as well have held
her tongue.

After very little farther discourse, it was finally settled that the
invitation should be fully accepted. Mrs. Jennings received the
information with a great deal of joy, and many assurances of kindness
and care; nor was it a matter of pleasure merely to her. Sir John was
delighted; for to a man, whose prevailing anxiety was the dread of
being alone, the acquisition of two, to the number of inhabitants in
London, was something. Even Lady Middleton took the trouble of being
delighted, which was putting herself rather out of her way; and as
for the Miss Steeles, especially Lucy, they had never been so happy in
their lives as this intelligence made them.

Elinor submitted to the arrangement which counteracted her wishes with
less reluctance than she had expected to feel. With regard to herself,
it was now a matter of unconcern whether she went to town or not, and
when she saw her mother so thoroughly pleased with the plan, and her
sister exhilarated by it in look, voice, and manner, restored to all
her usual animation, and elevated to more than her usual gaiety, she
could not be dissatisfied with the cause, and would hardly allow
herself to distrust the consequence.

Marianne's joy was almost a degree beyond happiness, so great was the
perturbation of her spirits and her impatience to be gone. Her
unwillingness to quit her mother was her only restorative to calmness;
and at the moment of parting her grief on that score was excessive.
Her mother's affliction was hardly less, and Elinor was the only one
of the three, who seemed to consider the separation as any thing short
of eternal.

Their departure took place in the first week in January. The
Middletons were to follow in about a week. The Miss Steeles kept their
station at the park, and were to quit it only with the rest of the
family.




CHAPTER XXVI


Elinor could not find herself in the carriage with Mrs. Jennings, and
beginning a journey to London under her protection, and as her guest,
without wondering at her own situation, so short had their
acquaintance with that lady been, so wholly unsuited were they in age
and disposition, and so many had been her objections against such a
measure only a few days before! But these objections had all, with
that happy ardour of youth which Marianne and her mother equally
shared, been overcome or overlooked; and Elinor, in spite of every
occasional doubt of Willoughby's constancy, could not witness the
rapture of delightful expectation which filled the whole soul and
beamed in the eyes of Marianne, without feeling how blank was her own
prospect, how cheerless her own state of mind in the comparison, and
how gladly she would engage in the solicitude of Marianne's situation
to have the same animating object in view, the same possibility of
hope. A short, a very short time however must now decide what
Willoughby's intentions were; in all probability he was already in
town. Marianne's eagerness to be gone declared her dependence on
finding him there; and Elinor was resolved not only upon gaining every
new light as to his character which her own observation or the
intelligence of others could give her, but likewise upon watching his
behaviour to her sister with such zealous attention, as to ascertain
what he was and what he meant, before many meetings had taken place.
Should the result of her observations be unfavourable, she was
determined at all events to open the eyes of her sister; should it be
otherwise, her exertions would be of a different nature--she must then
learn to avoid every selfish comparison, and banish every regret which
might lessen her satisfaction in the happiness of Marianne.

They were three days on their journey, and Marianne's behaviour as
they travelled was a happy specimen of what future complaisance and
companionableness to Mrs. Jennings might be expected to be. She sat in
silence almost all the way, wrapt in her own meditations, and scarcely
ever voluntarily speaking, except when any object of picturesque
beauty within their view drew from her an exclamation of delight
exclusively addressed to her sister. To atone for this conduct
therefore, Elinor took immediate possession of the post of civility
which she had assigned herself, behaved with the greatest attention to
Mrs. Jennings, talked with her, laughed with her, and listened to her
whenever she could; and Mrs. Jennings on her side treated them both
with all possible kindness, was solicitous on every occasion for their
ease and enjoyment, and only disturbed that she could not make them
choose their own dinners at the inn, nor extort a confession of their
preferring salmon to cod, or boiled fowls to veal cutlets. They
reached town by three o'clock the third day, glad to be released,
after such a journey, from the confinement of a carriage, and ready to
enjoy all the luxury of a good fire.

The house was handsome, and handsomely fitted up, and the young
ladies were immediately put in possession of a very comfortable
apartment. It had formerly been Charlotte's, and over the mantelpiece
still hung a landscape in coloured silks of her performance, in proof
of her having spent seven years at a great school in town to some
effect.

As dinner was not to be ready in less than two hours from their
arrival, Elinor determined to employ the interval in writing to her
mother, and sat down for that purpose. In a few moments Marianne did
the same. "I am writing home, Marianne," said Elinor; "had not you
better defer your letter for a day or two?"

"I am _not_ going to write to my mother," replied Marianne, hastily,
and as if wishing to avoid any farther inquiry. Elinor said no more;
it immediately struck her that she must then be writing to Willoughby;
and the conclusion which as instantly followed was, that, however
mysteriously they might wish to conduct the affair, they must be
engaged. This conviction, though not entirely satisfactory, gave her
pleasure, and she continued her letter with greater alacrity.
Marianne's was finished in a very few minutes; in length it could be
no more than a note; it was then folded up, sealed, and directed with
eager rapidity. Elinor thought she could distinguish a large W in the
direction; and no sooner was it complete than Marianne, ringing the
bell, requested the footman who answered it to get that letter
conveyed for her to the two-penny post. This decided the matter at
once.

Her spirits still continued very high; but there was a flutter in them
which prevented their giving much pleasure to her sister, and this
agitation increased as the evening drew on. She could scarcely eat any
dinner, and when they afterwards returned to the drawing room, seemed
anxiously listening to the sound of every carriage.

It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs. Jennings, by being
much engaged in her own room, could see little of what was passing.
The tea things were brought in, and already had Marianne been
disappointed more than once by a rap at a neighbouring door, when a
loud one was suddenly heard which could not be mistaken for one at any
other house, Elinor felt secure of its announcing Willoughby's
approach, and Marianne, starting up, moved towards the door. Every
thing was silent; this could not be borne many seconds; she opened
the door, advanced a few steps towards the stairs, and after listening
half a minute, returned into the room in all the agitation which a
conviction of having heard him would naturally produce; in the ecstasy
of her feelings at that instant she could not help exclaiming, "Oh,
Elinor, it is Willoughby, indeed it is!" and seemed almost ready to
throw herself into his arms, when Colonel Brandon appeared.

It was too great a shock to be borne with calmness, and she
immediately left the room. Elinor was disappointed too; but at the
same time her regard for Colonel Brandon ensured his welcome with her;
and she felt particularly hurt that a man so partial to her sister
should perceive that she experienced nothing but grief and
disappointment in seeing him. She instantly saw that it was not
unnoticed by him, that he even observed Marianne as she quitted the
room, with such astonishment and concern, as hardly left him the
recollection of what civility demanded towards herself.

"Is your sister ill?" said he.

Elinor answered in some distress that she was, and then talked of
head-aches, low spirits, and over fatigues; and of every thing to
which she could decently attribute her sister's behaviour.

He heard her with the most earnest attention, but seeming to recollect
himself, said no more on the subject, and began directly to speak of
his pleasure at seeing them in London, making the usual inquiries
about their journey, and the friends they had left behind.

In this calm kind of way, with very little interest on either side,
they continued to talk, both of them out of spirits, and the thoughts
of both engaged elsewhere. Elinor wished very much to ask whether
Willoughby were then in town, but she was afraid of giving him pain by
any enquiry after his rival; and at length, by way of saying
something, she asked if he had been in London ever since she had seen
him last. "Yes," he replied, with some embarrassment, "almost ever
since; I have been once or twice at Delaford for a few days, but it
has never been in my power to return to Barton."

This, and the manner in which it was said, immediately brought back to
her remembrance all the circumstances of his quitting that place, with
the uneasiness and suspicions they had caused to Mrs. Jennings, and
she was fearful that her question had implied much more curiosity on
the subject than she had ever felt.

Mrs. Jennings soon came in. "Oh! Colonel," said she, with her usual
noisy cheerfulness, "I am monstrous glad to see you--sorry I could not
come before--beg your pardon, but I have been forced to look about me
a little, and settle my matters; for it is a long while since I have
been at home, and you know one has always a world of little odd things
to do after one has been away for any time; and then I have had
Cartwright to settle with. Lord, I have been as busy as a bee ever
since dinner! But pray, Colonel, how came you to conjure out that I
should be in town today?"

"I had the pleasure of hearing it at Mr. Palmer's, where I have been
dining."

"Oh, you did; well, and how do they all do at their house? How does
Charlotte do? I warrant you she is a fine size by this time."

"Mrs. Palmer appeared quite well, and I am commissioned to tell you,
that you will certainly see her to-morrow."

"Ay, to be sure, I thought as much. Well, Colonel, I have brought two
young ladies with me, you see--that is, you see but one of them now,
but there is another somewhere. Your friend, Miss Marianne, too--which
you will not be sorry to hear. I do not know what you and Mr.
Willoughby will do between you about her. Ay, it is a fine thing to be
young and handsome. Well! I was young once, but I never was very
handsome--worse luck for me. However, I got a very good husband, and I
don't know what the greatest beauty can do more. Ah! poor man! he has
been dead these eight years and better. But Colonel, where have you
been to since we parted? And how does your business go on? Come, come,
let's have no secrets among friends."

He replied with his accustomary mildness to all her inquiries, but
without satisfying her in any. Elinor now began to make the tea, and
Marianne was obliged to appear again.

After her entrance, Colonel Brandon became more thoughtful and silent
than he had been before, and Mrs. Jennings could not prevail on him to
stay long. No other visitor appeared that evening, and the ladies were
unanimous in agreeing to go early to bed.

Marianne rose the next morning with recovered spirits and happy looks.
The disappointment of the evening before seemed forgotten in the
expectation of what was to happen that day. They had not long finished
their breakfast before Mrs. Palmer's barouche stopped at the door, and
in a few minutes she came laughing into the room: so delighted to see
them all, that it was hard to say whether she received most pleasure
from meeting her mother or the Miss Dashwoods again. So surprised at
their coming to town, though it was what she had rather expected all
along; so angry at their accepting her mother's invitation after
having declined her own, though at the same time she would never have
forgiven them if they had not come!

"Mr. Palmer will be so happy to see you," said she; "What do you think
he said when he heard of your coming with Mamma? I forget what it was
now, but it was something so droll!"

After an hour or two spent in what her mother called comfortable chat,
or in other words, in every variety of inquiry concerning all their
acquaintance on Mrs. Jennings's side, and in laughter without cause on
Mrs. Palmer's, it was proposed by the latter that they should all
accompany her to some shops where she had business that morning, to
which Mrs. Jennings and Elinor readily consented, as having likewise
some purchases to make themselves; and Marianne, though declining it
at first was induced to go likewise.

Wherever they went, she was evidently always on the watch. In Bond
Street especially, where much of their business lay, her eyes were in
constant inquiry; and in whatever shop the party were engaged, her
mind was equally abstracted from every thing actually before them,
from all that interested and occupied the others. Restless and
dissatisfied every where, her sister could never obtain her opinion of
any article of purchase, however it might equally concern them both:
she received no pleasure from anything; was only impatient to be at
home again, and could with difficulty govern her vexation at the
tediousness of Mrs. Palmer, whose eye was caught by every thing
pretty, expensive, or new; who was wild to buy all, could determine on
none, and dawdled away her time in rapture and indecision.

It was late in the morning before they returned home; and no sooner
had they entered the house than Marianne flew eagerly up stairs, and
when Elinor followed, she found her turning from the table with a
sorrowful countenance, which declared that no Willoughby had been
there.

"Has no letter been left here for me since we went out?" said she to
the footman who then entered with the parcels. She was answered in the
negative. "Are you quite sure of it?" she replied. "Are you certain
that no servant, no porter has left any letter or note?"

The man replied that none had.

"How very odd!" said she, in a low and disappointed voice, as she
turned away to the window.

"How odd, indeed!" repeated Elinor within herself, regarding her
sister with uneasiness. "If she had not known him to be in town she
would not have written to him, as she did; she would have written to
Combe Magna; and if he is in town, how odd that he should neither come
nor write! Oh! my dear mother, you must be wrong in permitting an
engagement between a daughter so young, a man so little known, to be
carried on in so doubtful, so mysterious a manner! I long to inquire;
and how will _my_ interference be borne."

She determined, after some consideration, that if appearances
continued many days longer as unpleasant as they now were, she would
represent in the strongest manner to her mother the necessity of some
serious enquiry into the affair.

Mrs. Palmer and two elderly ladies of Mrs. Jennings's intimate
acquaintance, whom she had met and invited in the morning, dined with
them. The former left them soon after tea to fulfill her evening
engagements; and Elinor was obliged to assist in making a whist table
for the others. Marianne was of no use on these occasions, as she
would never learn the game; but though her time was therefore at her
own disposal, the evening was by no means more productive of pleasure
to her than to Elinor, for it was spent in all the anxiety of
expectation and the pain of disappointment. She sometimes endeavoured
for a few minutes to read; but the book was soon thrown aside, and she
returned to the more interesting employment of walking backwards and
forwards across the room, pausing for a moment whenever she came to
the window, in hopes of distinguishing the long-expected rap.




CHAPTER XXVII


"If this open weather holds much longer," said Mrs. Jennings, when
they met at breakfast the following morning, "Sir John will not like
leaving Barton next week; 'tis a sad thing for sportsmen to lose a
day's pleasure. Poor souls! I always pity them when they do; they seem
to take it so much to heart."

"That is true," cried Marianne, in a cheerful voice, and walking to
the window as she spoke, to examine the day. "I had not thought of
that. This weather will keep many sportsmen in the country."

It was a lucky recollection, all her good spirits were restored by it.
"It is charming weather for _them_ indeed," she continued, as she sat
down to the breakfast table with a happy countenance. "How much they
must enjoy it! But" (with a little return of anxiety) "it cannot be
expected to last long. At this time of the year, and after such a
series of rain, we shall certainly have very little more of it. Frosts
will soon set in, and in all probability with severity. In another day
or two perhaps; this extreme mildness can hardly last longer--nay,
perhaps it may freeze tonight!"

"At any rate," said Elinor, wishing to prevent Mrs. Jennings from
seeing her sister's thoughts as clearly as she did, "I dare say we
shall have Sir John and Lady Middleton in town by the end of next
week."

"Ay, my dear, I'll warrant you we do. Mary always has her own way."

"And now," silently conjectured Elinor, "she will write to Combe by
this day's post."

But if she _did_, the letter was written and sent away with a privacy
which eluded all her watchfulness to ascertain the fact. Whatever the
truth of it might be, and far as Elinor was from feeling thorough
contentment about it, yet while she saw Marianne in spirits, she could
not be very uncomfortable herself. And Marianne was in spirits; happy
in the mildness of the weather, and still happier in her expectation
of a frost.

The morning was chiefly spent in leaving cards at the houses of Mrs.
Jennings's acquaintance to inform them of her being in town; and
Marianne was all the time busy in observing the direction of the wind,
watching the variations of the sky and imagining an alteration in the
air.

"Don't you find it colder than it was in the morning, Elinor? There
seems to me a very decided difference. I can hardly keep my hands warm
even in my muff. It was not so yesterday, I think. The clouds seem
parting too, the sun will be out in a moment, and we shall have a
clear afternoon."

Elinor was alternately diverted and pained; but Marianne persevered,
and saw every night in the brightness of the fire, and every morning
in the appearance of the atmosphere, the certain symptoms of
approaching frost.

The Miss Dashwoods had no greater reason to be dissatisfied with Mrs.
Jennings's style of living, and set of acquaintance, than with her
behaviour to themselves, which was invariably kind. Every thing in her
household arrangements was conducted on the most liberal plan, and
excepting a few old city friends, whom, to Lady Middleton's regret,
she had never dropped, she visited no one to whom an introduction
could at all discompose the feelings of her young companions. Pleased
to find herself more comfortably situated in that particular than she
had expected, Elinor was very willing to compound for the want of much
real enjoyment from any of their evening parties, which, whether at
home or abroad, formed only for cards, could have little to amuse her.

Colonel Brandon, who had a general invitation to the house, was with
them almost every day; he came to look at Marianne and talk to Elinor,
who often derived more satisfaction from conversing with him than from
any other daily occurrence, but who saw at the same time with much
concern his continued regard for her sister. She feared it was a
strengthening regard. It grieved her to see the earnestness with which
he often watched Marianne, and his spirits were certainly worse than
when at Barton.

About a week after their arrival, it became certain that Willoughby
was also arrived. His card was on the table when they came in from the
morning's drive.

"Good God!" cried Marianne, "he has been here while we were out."
Elinor, rejoiced to be assured of his being in London, now ventured
to say, "Depend upon it, he will call again tomorrow." But Marianne
seemed hardly to hear her, and on Mrs. Jennings's entrance, escaped
with the precious card.

This event, while it raised the spirits of Elinor, restored to those
of her sister all, and more than all, their former agitation. From
this moment her mind was never quiet; the expectation of seeing him
every hour of the day, made her unfit for any thing. She insisted on
being left behind, the next morning, when the others went out.

Elinor's thoughts were full of what might be passing in Berkeley
Street during their absence; but a moment's glance at her sister when
they returned was enough to inform her, that Willoughby had paid no
second visit there. A note was just then brought in, and laid on the
table.

"For me!" cried Marianne, stepping hastily forward.

"No, ma'am, for my mistress."

But Marianne, not convinced, took it instantly up.

"It is indeed for Mrs. Jennings; how provoking!"

"You are expecting a letter, then?" said Elinor, unable to be longer
silent.

"Yes, a little--not much."

After a short pause. "You have no confidence in me, Marianne."

"Nay, Elinor, this reproach from _you_--you who have confidence in no
one!"

"Me!" returned Elinor in some confusion; "indeed, Marianne, I have
nothing to tell."

"Nor I," answered Marianne with energy, "our situations then are
alike. We have neither of us any thing to tell; you, because you do
not communicate, and I, because I conceal nothing."

Elinor, distressed by this charge of reserve in herself, which she was
not at liberty to do away, knew not how, under such circumstances, to
press for greater openness in Marianne.

Mrs. Jennings soon appeared, and the note being given her, she read it
aloud. It was from Lady Middleton, announcing their arrival in Conduit
Street the night before, and requesting the company of her mother and
cousins the following evening. Business on Sir John's part, and a
violent cold on her own, prevented their calling in Berkeley Street.
The invitation was accepted; but when the hour of appointment drew
near, necessary as it was in common civility to Mrs. Jennings, that
they should both attend her on such a visit, Elinor had some
difficulty in persuading her sister to go, for still she had seen
nothing of Willoughby; and therefore was not more indisposed for
amusement abroad, than unwilling to run the risk of his calling again
in her absence.

Elinor found, when the evening was over, that disposition is not
materially altered by a change of abode, for although scarcely settled
in town, Sir John had contrived to collect around him, nearly twenty
young people, and to amuse them with a ball. This was an affair,
however, of which Lady Middleton did not approve. In the country, an
unpremeditated dance was very allowable; but in London, where the
reputation of elegance was more important and less easily attained, it
was risking too much for the gratification of a few girls, to have it
known that Lady Middleton had given a small dance of eight or nine
couple, with two violins, and a mere side-board collation.

Mr. and Mrs. Palmer were of the party; from the former, whom they had
not seen before since their arrival in town, as he was careful to
avoid the appearance of any attention to his mother-in-law, and
therefore never came near her, they received no mark of recognition on
their entrance. He looked at them slightly, without seeming to know
who they were, and merely nodded to Mrs. Jennings from the other side
of the room. Marianne gave one glance round the apartment as she
entered: it was enough--_he_ was not there--and she sat down, equally
ill-disposed to receive or communicate pleasure. After they had been
assembled about an hour, Mr. Palmer sauntered towards the Miss
Dashwoods to express his surprise on seeing them in town, though
Colonel Brandon had been first informed of their arrival at his house,
and he had himself said something very droll on hearing that they were
to come.

"I thought you were both in Devonshire," said he.

"Did you?" replied Elinor.

"When do you go back again?"

"I do not know." And thus ended their discourse.

Never had Marianne been so unwilling to dance in her life, as she was
that evening, and never so much fatigued by the exercise. She
complained of it as they returned to Berkeley Street.

"Aye, aye," said Mrs. Jennings, "we know the reason of all that very
well; if a certain person who shall be nameless, had been there, you
would not have been a bit tired: and to say the truth it was not very
pretty of him not to give you the meeting when he was invited."

"Invited!" cried Marianne.

"So my daughter Middleton told me, for it seems Sir John met him
somewhere in the street this morning." Marianne said no more, but
looked exceedingly hurt. Impatient in this situation to be doing
something that might lead to her sister's relief, Elinor resolved to
write the next morning to her mother, and hoped by awakening her fears
for the health of Marianne, to procure those inquiries which had been
so long delayed; and she was still more eagerly bent on this measure
by perceiving after breakfast on the morrow, that Marianne was again
writing to Willoughby, for she could not suppose it to be to any other
person.

About the middle of the day, Mrs. Jennings went out by herself on
business, and Elinor began her letter directly, while Marianne, too
restless for employment, too anxious for conversation, walked from one
window to the other, or sat down by the fire in melancholy meditation.
Elinor was very earnest in her application to her mother, relating all
that had passed, her suspicions of Willoughby's inconstancy, urging
her by every plea of duty and affection to demand from Marianne an
account of her real situation with respect to him.

Her letter was scarcely finished, when a rap foretold a visitor, and
Colonel Brandon was announced. Marianne, who had seen him from the
window, and who hated company of any kind, left the room before he
entered it. He looked more than usually grave, and though expressing
satisfaction at finding Miss Dashwood alone, as if he had somewhat in
particular to tell her, sat for some time without saying a word.
Elinor, persuaded that he had some communication to make in which her
sister was concerned, impatiently expected its opening. It was not the
first time of her feeling the same kind of conviction; for, more than
once before, beginning with the observation of "your sister looks
unwell to-day," or "your sister seems out of spirits," he had
appeared on the point, either of disclosing, or of inquiring,
something particular about her. After a pause of several minutes,
their silence was broken, by his asking her in a voice of some
agitation, when he was to congratulate her on the acquisition of a
brother? Elinor was not prepared for such a question, and having no
answer ready, was obliged to adopt the simple and common expedient, of
asking what he meant? He tried to smile as he replied, "your sister's
engagement to Mr. Willoughby is very generally known."

"It cannot be generally known," returned Elinor, "for her own family
do not know it."

He looked surprised and said, "I beg your pardon, I am afraid my
inquiry has been impertinent; but I had not supposed any secrecy
intended, as they openly correspond, and their marriage is universally
talked of."

"How can that be? By whom can you have heard it mentioned?"

"By many--by some of whom you know nothing, by others with whom you
are most intimate, Mrs. Jennings, Mrs. Palmer, and the Middletons. But
still I might not have believed it, for where the mind is perhaps
rather unwilling to be convinced, it will always find something to
support its doubts, if I had not, when the servant let me in today,
accidentally seen a letter in his hand, directed to Mr. Willoughby in
your sister's writing. I came to inquire, but I was convinced before I
could ask the question. Is every thing finally settled? Is it
impossible to-? But I have no right, and I could have no chance of
succeeding. Excuse me, Miss Dashwood. I believe I have been wrong in
saying so much, but I hardly know what to do, and on your prudence I
have the strongest dependence. Tell me that it is all absolutely
resolved on, that any attempt, that in short concealment, if
concealment be possible, is all that remains."

These words, which conveyed to Elinor a direct avowal of his love for
her sister, affected her very much. She was not immediately able to
say anything, and even when her spirits were recovered, she debated
for a short time, on the answer it would be most proper to give. The
real state of things between Willoughby and her sister was so little
known to herself, that in endeavouring to explain it, she might be as
liable to say too much as too little. Yet as she was convinced that
Marianne's affection for Willoughby, could leave no hope of Colonel
Brandon's success, whatever the event of that affection might be, and
at the same time wished to shield her conduct from censure, she
thought it most prudent and kind, after some consideration, to say
more than she really knew or believed. She acknowledged, therefore,
that though she had never been informed by themselves of the terms on
which they stood with each other, of their mutual affection she had no
doubt, and of their correspondence she was not astonished to hear.

He listened to her with silent attention, and on her ceasing to speak,
rose directly from his seat, and after saying in a voice of emotion,
"to your sister I wish all imaginable happiness; to Willoughby that he
may endeavour to deserve her,"--took leave, and went away.

Elinor derived no comfortable feelings from this conversation, to
lessen the uneasiness of her mind on other points; she was left, on
the contrary, with a melancholy impression of Colonel Brandon's
unhappiness, and was prevented even from wishing it removed, by her
anxiety for the very event that must confirm it.




CHAPTER XXVIII


Nothing occurred during the next three or four days, to make Elinor
regret what she had done, in applying to her mother; for Willoughby
neither came nor wrote. They were engaged about the end of that time
to attend Lady Middleton to a party, from which Mrs. Jennings was kept
away by the indisposition of her youngest daughter; and for this
party, Marianne, wholly dispirited, careless of her appearance, and
seeming equally indifferent whether she went or staid, prepared,
without one look of hope or one expression of pleasure. She sat by the
drawing-room fire after tea, till the moment of Lady Middleton's
arrival, without once stirring from her seat, or altering her
attitude, lost in her own thoughts, and insensible of her sister's
presence; and when at last they were told that Lady Middleton waited
for them at the door, she started as if she had forgotten that any one
was expected.

They arrived in due time at the place of destination, and as soon as
the string of carriages before them would allow, alighted, ascended
the stairs, heard their names announced from one landing-place to
another in an audible voice, and entered a room splendidly lit up,
quite full of company, and insufferably hot. When they had paid their
tribute of politeness by curtsying to the lady of the house, they were
permitted to mingle in the crowd, and take their share of the heat and
inconvenience, to which their arrival must necessarily add. After some
time spent in saying little or doing less, Lady Middleton sat down to
Cassino, and as Marianne was not in spirits for moving about, she and
Elinor luckily succeeding to chairs, placed themselves at no great
distance from the table.

They had not remained in this manner long, before Elinor perceived
Willoughby, standing within a few yards of them, in earnest
conversation with a very fashionable looking young woman. She soon
caught his eye, and he immediately bowed, but without attempting to
speak to her, or to approach Marianne, though he could not but see
her; and then continued his discourse with the same lady. Elinor
turned involuntarily to Marianne, to see whether it could be
unobserved by her. At that moment she first perceived him, and her
whole countenance glowing with sudden delight, she would have moved
towards him instantly, had not her sister caught hold of her.

"Good heavens!" she exclaimed, "he is there--he is there--Oh! why does
he not look at me? why cannot I speak to him?"

"Pray, pray be composed," cried Elinor, "and do not betray what you
feel to every body present. Perhaps he has not observed you yet."

This however was more than she could believe herself; and to be
composed at such a moment was not only beyond the reach of Marianne,
it was beyond her wish. She sat in an agony of impatience which
affected every feature.

[Illustration: _At that moment she first perceived him._]

At last he turned round again, and regarded them both; she started up,
and pronouncing his name in a tone of affection, held out her hand to
him. He approached, and addressing himself rather to Elinor than
Marianne, as if wishing to avoid her eye, and determined not to
observe her attitude, inquired in a hurried manner after Mrs.
Dashwood, and asked how long they had been in town. Elinor was robbed
of all presence of mind by such an address, and was unable to say a
word. But the feelings of her sister were instantly expressed. Her
face was crimsoned over, and she exclaimed, in a voice of the greatest
emotion, "Good God! Willoughby, what is the meaning of this? Have you
not received my letters? Will you not shake hands with me?"

He could not then avoid it, but her touch seemed painful to him, and
he held her hand only for a moment. During all this time he was
evidently struggling for composure. Elinor watched his countenance and
saw its expression becoming more tranquil. After a moment's pause, he
spoke with calmness.

"I did myself the honour of calling in Berkeley Street last Tuesday,
and very much regretted that I was not fortunate enough to find
yourselves and Mrs. Jennings at home. My card was not lost, I hope."

"But have you not received my notes?" cried Marianne in the wildest
anxiety. "Here is some mistake I am sure--some dreadful mistake. What
can be the meaning of it? Tell me, Willoughby; for heaven's sake tell
me, what is the matter?"

He made no reply; his complexion changed and all his embarrassment
returned; but as if, on catching the eye of the young lady with whom
he had been previously talking, he felt the necessity of instant
exertion, he recovered himself again, and after saying, "Yes, I had
the pleasure of receiving the information of your arrival in town,
which you were so good as to send me," turned hastily away with a
slight bow and joined his friend.

Marianne, now looking dreadfully white, and unable to stand, sunk into
her chair, and Elinor, expecting every moment to see her faint, tried
to screen her from the observation of others, while reviving her with
lavender water.

"Go to him, Elinor," she cried, as soon as she could speak, "and force
him to come to me. Tell him I must see him again--must speak to him
instantly. I cannot rest--I shall not have a moment's peace till this
is explained--some dreadful misapprehension or other. Oh, go to him
this moment."

"How can that be done? No, my dearest Marianne, you must wait. This is
not the place for explanations. Wait only till tomorrow."

With difficulty however could she prevent her from following him
herself; and to persuade her to check her agitation, to wait, at
least, with the appearance of composure, till she might speak to him
with more privacy and more effect, was impossible; for Marianne
continued incessantly to give way in a low voice to the misery of her
feelings, by exclamations of wretchedness. In a short time Elinor saw
Willoughby quit the room by the door towards the staircase, and
telling Marianne that he was gone, urged the impossibility of speaking
to him again that evening, as a fresh argument for her to be calm. She
instantly begged her sister would entreat Lady Middleton to take them
home, as she was too miserable to stay a minute longer.

Lady Middleton, though in the middle of a rubber, on being informed
that Marianne was unwell, was too polite to object for a moment to her
wish of going away, and making over her cards to a friend, they
departed as soon as the carriage could be found. Scarcely a word was
spoken during their return to Berkeley Street. Marianne was in a
silent agony, too much oppressed even for tears; but as Mrs. Jennings
was luckily not come home, they could go directly to their own room,
where hartshorn restored her a little to herself. She was soon
undressed and in bed, and as she seemed desirous of being alone, her
sister then left her, and while she waited the return of Mrs.
Jennings, had leisure enough for thinking over the past.

That some kind of engagement had subsisted between Willoughby and
Marianne she could not doubt, and that Willoughby was weary of it,
seemed equally clear; for however Marianne might still feed her own
wishes, _she_ could not attribute such behaviour to mistake or
misapprehension of any kind. Nothing but a thorough change of
sentiment could account for it. Her indignation would have been still
stronger than it was, had she not witnessed that embarrassment which
seemed to speak a consciousness of his own misconduct, and prevented
her from believing him so unprincipled as to have been sporting with
the affections of her sister from the first, without any design that
would bear investigation. Absence might have weakened his regard, and
convenience might have determined him to overcome it, but that such a
regard had formerly existed she could not bring herself to doubt.

As for Marianne, on the pangs which so unhappy a meeting must already
have given her, and on those still more severe which might await her
in its probable consequence, she could not reflect without the deepest
concern. Her own situation gained in the comparison; for while she
could _esteem_ Edward as much as ever, however they might be divided
in future, her mind might be always supported. But every circumstance
that could embitter such an evil seemed uniting to heighten the misery
of Marianne in a final separation from Willoughby--in an immediate and
irreconcilable rupture with him.




CHAPTER XXIX


Before the housemaid had lit their fire the next day, or the sun
gained any power over a cold, gloomy morning in January, Marianne,
only half dressed, was kneeling against one of the window-seats for
the sake of all the little light she could command from it, and
writing as fast as a continual flow of tears would permit her. In this
situation, Elinor, roused from sleep by her agitation and sobs, first
perceived her; and after observing her for a few moments with silent
anxiety, said, in a tone of the most considerate gentleness--

"Marianne, may I ask--"

"No, Elinor," she replied, "ask nothing; you will soon know all."

The sort of desperate calmness with which this was said, lasted no
longer than while she spoke, and was immediately followed by a return
of the same excessive affliction. It was some minutes before she could
go on with her letter, and the frequent bursts of grief which still
obliged her, at intervals, to withhold her pen, were proofs enough of
her feeling how more than probable it was that she was writing for the
last time to Willoughby.

Elinor paid her every quiet and unobtrusive attention in her power;
and she would have tried to sooth and tranquilize her still more, had
not Marianne entreated her, with all the eagerness of the most nervous
irritability, not to speak to her for the world. In such
circumstances, it was better for both that they should not be long
together; and the restless state of Marianne's mind not only prevented
her from remaining in the room a moment after she was dressed, but
requiring at once solitude and continual change of place, made her
wander about the house till breakfast time, avoiding the sight of
every body.

At breakfast she neither ate, nor attempted to eat any thing; and
Elinor's attention was then all employed, not in urging her, not in
pitying her, nor in appearing to regard her, but in endeavouring to
engage Mrs. Jennings's notice entirely to herself.

As this was a favourite meal with Mrs. Jennings, it lasted a
considerable time, and they were just setting themselves, after it,
round the common working table, when a letter was delivered to
Marianne, which she eagerly caught from the servant, and, turning of a
death-like paleness, instantly ran out of the room. Elinor, who saw as
plainly by this, as if she had seen the direction, that it must come
from Willoughby, felt immediately such a sickness at heart as made her
hardly able to hold up her head, and sat in such a general tremor as
made her fear it impossible to escape Mrs. Jennings's notice. That
good lady, however, saw only that Marianne had received a letter from
Willoughby, which appeared to her a very good joke, and which she
treated accordingly, by hoping, with a laugh, that she would find it
to her liking. Of Elinor's distress, she was too busily employed in
measuring lengths of worsted for her rug, to see any thing at all; and
calmly continuing her talk, as soon as Marianne disappeared, she
said--

"Upon my word, I never saw a young woman so desperately in love in my
life! _My_ girls were nothing to her, and yet they used to be foolish
enough; but as for Miss Marianne, she is quite an altered creature. I
hope, from the bottom of my heart, he won't keep her waiting much
longer, for it is quite grievous to see her look so ill and forlorn.
Pray, when are they to be married?"

Elinor, though never less disposed to speak than at that moment,
obliged herself to answer such an attack as this, and, therefore,
trying to smile, replied, "And have you really, Ma'am, talked yourself
into a persuasion of my sister's being engaged to Mr. Willoughby? I
thought it had been only a joke, but so serious a question seems to
imply more; and I must beg, therefore, that you will not deceive
yourself any longer. I do assure you that nothing would surprise me
more than to hear of their being going to be married."

"For shame, for shame, Miss Dashwood! how can you talk so? Don't we
all know that it must be a match, that they were over head and ears in
love with each other from the first moment they met? Did not I see
them together in Devonshire every day, and all day long; and did not I
know that your sister came to town with me on purpose to buy wedding
clothes? Come, come, this won't do. Because you are so sly about it
yourself, you think nobody else has any senses; but it is no such
thing, I can tell you, for it has been known all over town this ever
so long. I tell every body of it and so does Charlotte."

"Indeed, Ma'am," said Elinor, very seriously, "you are mistaken.
Indeed, you are doing a very unkind thing in spreading the report, and
you will find that you have though you will not believe me now."

Mrs. Jennings laughed again, but Elinor had not spirits to say more,
and eager at all events to know what Willoughby had written, hurried
away to their room, where, on opening the door, she saw Marianne
stretched on the bed, almost choked by grief, one letter in her hand,
and two or three others laying by her. Elinor drew near, but without
saying a word; and seating herself on the bed, took her hand, kissed
her affectionately several times, and then gave way to a burst of
tears, which at first was scarcely less violent than Marianne's. The
latter, though unable to speak, seemed to feel all the tenderness of
this behaviour, and after some time thus spent in joint affliction,
she put all the letters into Elinor's hands; and then covering her
face with her handkerchief, almost screamed with agony. Elinor, who
knew that such grief, shocking as it was to witness it, must have its
course, watched by her till this excess of suffering had somewhat
spent itself, and then turning eagerly to Willoughby's letter, read as
follows:--

"Bond Street, January.

"MY DEAR MADAM,

     "I have just had the honour of receiving your letter, for
     which I beg to return my sincere acknowledgments. I am much
     concerned to find there was anything in my behaviour last
     night that did not meet your approbation; and though I am
     quite at a loss to discover in what point I could be so
     unfortunate as to offend you, I entreat your forgiveness of
     what I can assure you to have been perfectly unintentional.
     I shall never reflect on my former acquaintance with your
     family in Devonshire without the most grateful pleasure, and
     flatter myself it will not be broken by any mistake or
     misapprehension of my actions. My esteem for your whole
     family is very sincere; but if I have been so unfortunate as
     to give rise to a belief of more than I felt, or meant to
     express, I shall reproach myself for not having been more
     guarded in my professions of that esteem. That I should ever
     have meant more you will allow to be impossible, when you
     understand that my affections have been long engaged
     elsewhere, and it will not be many weeks, I believe, before
     this engagement is fulfilled. It is with great regret that I
     obey your commands in returning the letters with which I
     have been honoured from you, and the lock of hair, which you
     so obligingly bestowed on me.

I am, dear Madam,

Your most obedient humble servant,

"JOHN WILLOUGHBY."

With what indignation such a letter as this must be read by Miss
Dashwood, may be imagined. Though aware, before she began it, that it
must bring a confession of his inconstancy, and confirm their
separation for ever, she was not aware that such language could be
suffered to announce it; nor could she have supposed Willoughby
capable of departing so far from the appearance of every honourable
and delicate feeling--so far from the common decorum of a gentleman,
as to send a letter so impudently cruel: a letter which, instead of
bringing with his desire of a release any professions of regret,
acknowledged no breach of faith, denied all peculiar affection
whatever;--a letter of which every line was an insult, and which
proclaimed its writer to be deep in hardened villainy.

She paused over it for some time with indignant astonishment; then
read it again and again; but every perusal only served to increase
her abhorrence of the man, and so bitter were her feelings against
him, that she dared not trust herself to speak, lest she might wound
Marianne still deeper by treating their disengagement, not as a loss
to her of any possible good but as an escape from the worst and most
irremediable of all evils,--a connection, for life, with an
unprincipled man, as a deliverance the most real, a blessing the most
important.

In her earnest meditations on the contents of the letter, on the
depravity of that mind which could dictate it, and probably, on the
very different mind of a very different person, who had no other
connection whatever with the affair than what her heart gave him with
every thing that passed, Elinor forgot the immediate distress of her
sister, forgot that she had three letters on her lap yet unread, and
so entirely forgot how long she had been in the room, that when on
hearing a carriage drive up to the door, she went to the window to see
who could be coming so unreasonably early, she was all astonishment to
perceive Mrs. Jennings's chariot, which she knew had not been ordered
till one. Determined not to quit Marianne, though hopeless of
contributing, at present, to her ease, she hurried away to excuse
herself from attending Mrs. Jennings, on account of her sister being
indisposed. Mrs. Jennings, with a thoroughly good-humoured concern for
its cause, admitted the excuse most readily, and Elinor, after seeing
her safe off, returned to Marianne, whom she found attempting to rise
from the bed, and whom she reached just in time to prevent her from
falling on the floor, faint and giddy from a long want of proper rest
and food; for it was many days since she had any appetite, and many
nights since she had really slept; and now, when her mind was no
longer supported by the fever of suspense, the consequence of all this
was felt in an aching head, a weakened stomach, and a general nervous
faintness. A glass of wine, which Elinor procured for her directly,
made her more comfortable, and she was at last able to express some
sense of her kindness, by saying, "Poor Elinor! how unhappy I make
you!"

"I only wish," replied her sister, "there were any thing I _could_ do,
which might be of comfort to you."

This, as every thing else would have been, was too much for Marianne,
who could only exclaim, in the anguish of her heart, "Oh! Elinor, I
am miserable, indeed," before her voice was entirely lost in sobs.

Elinor could no longer witness this torrent of unresisted grief in
silence.

"Exert yourself, dear Marianne," she cried, "if you would not kill
yourself and all who love you. Think of your mother; think of her
misery while _you_ suffer: for her sake you must exert yourself."

"I cannot, I cannot," cried Marianne; "leave me, leave me, if I
distress you; leave me, hate me, forget me! but do not torture me so.
Oh! how easy for those, who have no sorrow of their own to talk of
exertion! Happy, happy Elinor, _you_ cannot have an idea of what I
suffer."

"Do you call _me_ happy, Marianne? Ah! if you knew! And can you
believe me to be so, while I see you so wretched!"

"Forgive me, forgive me," throwing her arms round her sister's neck;
"I know you feel for me; I know what a heart you have; but yet you
are--you must be happy; Edward loves you--what, oh what, can do away
such happiness as that?"

"Many, many circumstances," said Elinor, solemnly.

"No, no, no," cried Marianne wildly, "he loves you, and only you. You
_can_ have no grief."

"I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state."

"And you will never see me otherwise. Mine is a misery which nothing
can do away."

"You must not talk so, Marianne. Have you no comforts? no friends? Is
your loss such as leaves no opening for consolation? Much as you
suffer now, think of what you would have suffered if the discovery of
his character had been delayed to a later period;--if your engagement
had been carried on for months and months, as it might have been,
before he chose to put an end to it. Every additional day of unhappy
confidence, on your side, would have made the blow more dreadful."

"Engagement!" cried Marianne, "there has been no engagement."

"No engagement!"

"No, he is not so unworthy as you believe him. He has broken no faith
with me."

"But he told you that he loved you."

"Yes--no--never absolutely. It was every day implied, but never
professedly declared. Sometimes I thought it had been--but it never
was."

"Yet you wrote to him?"

"Yes: could that be wrong after all that had passed? But I cannot
talk."

Elinor said no more, and turning again to the three letters which now
raised a much stronger curiosity than before, directly ran over the
contents of all. The first, which was what her sister had sent him on
their arrival in town, was to this effect:--

"Berkeley Street, January.

     "How surprised you will be, Willoughby, on receiving this;
     and I think you will feel something more than surprise, when
     you know that I am in town. An opportunity of coming hither,
     though with Mrs. Jennings, was a temptation we could not
     resist. I wish you may receive this in time to come here
     tonight, but I will not depend on it. At any rate I shall
     expect you to-morrow. For the present, adieu.

M.D."

Her second note, which had been written on the morning after the dance
at the Middletons', was in these words:--

     "I cannot express my disappointment in having missed you the
     day before yesterday, nor my astonishment at not having
     received any answer to a note which I sent you above a week
     ago. I have been expecting to hear from you, and still more
     to see you, every hour of the day. Pray call again as soon
     as possible, and explain the reason of my having expected
     this in vain. You had better come earlier another time,
     because we are generally out by one. We were last night at
     Lady Middleton's, where there was a dance. I have been told
     that you were asked to be of the party. But could it be so?
     You must be very much altered indeed since we parted, if
     that could be the case, and you not there. But I will not
     suppose this possible, and I hope very soon to receive your
     personal assurance of its being otherwise.

M.D."

The contents of her last note to him were these:--

     "What am I to imagine, Willoughby, by your behaviour last
     night? Again I demand an explanation of it. I was prepared
     to meet you with the pleasure which our separation naturally
     produced,--with the familiarity which our intimacy at Barton
     appeared to me to justify. I was repulsed indeed! I have
     passed a wretched night in endeavouring to excuse a conduct
     which can scarcely be called less than insulting; but though
     I have not yet been able to form any reasonable apology for
     your behaviour, I am perfectly ready to hear your
     justification of it. You have perhaps been misinformed, or
     purposely deceived, in something concerning me, which may
     have lowered me in your opinion. Tell me what it is, explain
     the grounds on which you acted, and I shall be satisfied, in
     being able to satisfy you. It would grieve me indeed to be
     obliged to think ill of you; but if I am to do it, if I am
     to learn that you are not what we have hitherto believed
     you, that your regard for us all was insincere, that your
     behaviour to me was intended only to deceive, let it be told
     as soon as possible. My feelings are at present in a state
     of dreadful indecision; I wish to acquit you, but certainty
     on either side will be ease to what I now suffer. If your
     sentiments are no longer what they were, you will return my
     notes, and the lock of my hair which is in your possession.

M.D."

That such letters, so full of affection and confidence, could have
been so answered, Elinor, for Willoughby's sake, would have been
unwilling to believe. But her condemnation of him did not blind her to
the impropriety of their having been written at all; and she was
silently grieving over the imprudence which had hazarded such
unsolicited proofs of tenderness, not warranted by anything preceding,
and most severely condemned by the event, when Marianne, perceiving
that she had finished the letters, observed to her that they contained
nothing but what any one would have written in the same situation.

"I felt myself," she added, "to be as solemnly engaged to him, as if
the strictest legal covenant had bound us to each other."

"I can believe it," said Elinor; "but unfortunately he did not feel
the same."

"He _did_ feel the same, Elinor--for weeks and weeks he felt it. I
know he did. Whatever may have changed him now, (and nothing but the
blackest art employed against me can have done it), I was once as dear
to him as my own soul could wish. This lock of hair, which now he can
so readily give up, was begged of me with the most earnest
supplication. Had you seen his look, his manner, had you heard his
voice at that moment! Have you forgot the last evening of our being
together at Barton? The morning that we parted too! When he told me
that it might be many weeks before we met again--his distress--can I
ever forget his distress?"

For a moment or two she could say no more; but when this emotion had
passed away, she added, in a firmer tone--

"Elinor, I have been cruelly used; but not by Willoughby."

"Dearest Marianne, who but himself? By whom can he have been
instigated?"

"By all the world, rather than by his own heart. I could rather
believe every creature of my acquaintance leagued together to ruin me
in his opinion, than believe his nature capable of such cruelty. This
woman of whom he writes--whoever she be--or any one, in short, but
your own dear self, mama, and Edward, may have been so barbarous to
bely me. Beyond you three, is there a creature in the world whom I
would not rather suspect of evil than Willoughby, whose heart I know
so well?"

Elinor would not contend, and only replied, "Whoever may have been so
detestably your enemy, let them be cheated of their malignant triumph,
my dear sister, by seeing how nobly the consciousness of your own
innocence and good intentions supports your spirits. It is a
reasonable and laudable pride which resists such malevolence."

"No, no," cried Marianne, "misery such as mine has no pride. I care
not who knows that I am wretched. The triumph of seeing me so may be
open to all the world. Elinor, Elinor, they who suffer little may be
proud and independent as they like--may resist insult, or return
mortification--but I cannot. I must feel--I must be wretched--and they
are welcome to enjoy the consciousness of it that can."

"But for my mother's sake and mine--"

"I would do more than for my own. But to appear happy when I am so
miserable--oh! who can require it?"

Again they were both silent. Elinor was employed in walking
thoughtfully from the fire to the window, from the window to the fire,
without knowing that she received warmth from one, or discerning
objects through the other; and Marianne, seated at the foot of the
bed, with her head leaning against one of its posts, again took up
Willoughby's letter, and, after shuddering over every sentence,
exclaimed--

"It is too much! Oh, Willoughby, Willoughby, could this be yours!
Cruel, cruel--nothing can acquit you. Elinor, nothing can. Whatever he
might have heard against me, ought he not to have suspended his
belief? ought he not to have told me of it, to have given me the power
of clearing myself? 'The lock of hair, (repeating it from the letter,)
which you so obligingly bestowed on me'--that is unpardonable.
Willoughby, where was your heart when you wrote those words? Oh,
barbarously insolent!--Elinor, can he be justified?"

"No, Marianne, in no possible way."

"And yet this woman--who knows what her art may have been?--how long
it may have been premeditated, and how deeply contrived by her!--Who
is she?--Who can she be?--Whom did I ever hear him talk of as young
and attractive among his female acquaintance?--Oh! no one, no one:--he
talked to me only of myself."

Another pause ensued; Marianne was greatly agitated, and it ended
thus:--

"Elinor, I must go home. I must go and comfort mama. Can not we be
gone to-morrow?"

"To-morrow, Marianne!"

"Yes, why should I stay here? I came only for Willoughby's sake--and
now who cares for me? Who regards me?"

"It would be impossible to go to-morrow. We owe Mrs. Jennings much
more than civility; and civility of the commonest kind must prevent
such a hasty removal as that."

"Well then, another day or two, perhaps; but I cannot stay here long,
I cannot stay to endure the questions and remarks of all these people.
The Middletons and Palmers--how am I to bear their pity? The pity of
such a woman as Lady Middleton! Oh, what would _he_ say to that!"

Elinor advised her to lie down again, and for a moment she did so; but
no attitude could give her ease; and in restless pain of mind and body
she moved from one posture to another, till growing more and more
hysterical, her sister could with difficulty keep her on the bed at
all, and for some time was fearful of being constrained to call for
assistance. Some lavender drops, however, which she was at length
persuaded to take, were of use; and from that time till Mrs. Jennings
returned, she continued on the bed quiet and motionless.




CHAPTER XXX


Mrs. Jennings came immediately to their room on her return, and
without waiting to have her request of admittance answered, opened the
door and walked in with a look of real concern.

"How do you do my dear?" said she in a voice of great compassion to
Marianne, who turned away her face without attempting to answer.

"How is she, Miss Dashwood? Poor thing! she looks very bad. No
wonder. Ay, it is but too true. He is to be married very soon--a
good-for-nothing fellow! I have no patience with him. Mrs. Taylor told
me of it half an hour ago, and she was told it by a particular friend
of Miss Grey herself, else I am sure I should not have believed it;
and I was almost ready to sink as it was. Well, said I, all I can say
is, that if this be true, he has used a young lady of my acquaintance
abominably ill, and I wish with all my soul his wife may plague his
heart out. And so I shall always say, my dear, you may depend on it. I
have no notion of men's going on in this way; and if ever I meet him
again, I will give him such a dressing as he has not had this many a
day. But there is one comfort, my dear Miss Marianne--he is not the
only young man in the world worth having; and with your pretty face
you will never want admirers. Well, poor thing! I won't disturb her
any longer, for she had better have her cry out at once and have done
with. The Parrys and Sandersons luckily are coming tonight you know,
and that will amuse her."

She then went away, walking on tiptoe out of the room, as if she
supposed her young friend's affliction could be increased by noise.

Marianne, to the surprise of her sister, determined on dining with
them. Elinor even advised her against it. But "no, she would go down;
she could bear it very well, and the bustle about her would be less."
Elinor, pleased to have her governed for a moment by such a motive,
though believing it hardly possible that she could sit out the dinner,
said no more; and adjusting her dress for her as well as she could,
while Marianne still remained on the bed, was ready to assist her into
the dining room as soon as they were summoned to it.

When there, though looking most wretchedly, she ate more and was
calmer than her sister had expected. Had she tried to speak, or had
she been conscious of half Mrs. Jennings's well-meant but ill-judged
attentions to her, this calmness could not have been maintained; but
not a syllable escaped her lips; and the abstraction of her thoughts
preserved her in ignorance of every thing that was passing before her.

Elinor, who did justice to Mrs. Jennings's kindness, though its
effusions were often distressing, and sometimes almost ridiculous,
made her those acknowledgments, and returned her those civilities,
which her sister could not make or return for herself. Their good
friend saw that Marianne was unhappy, and felt that every thing was
due to her which might make her at all less so. She treated her
therefore, with all the indulgent fondness of a parent towards a
favourite child on the last day of its holidays. Marianne was to have
the best place by the fire, was to be tempted to eat by every delicacy
in the house, and to be amused by the relation of all the news of the
day. Had not Elinor, in the sad countenance of her sister, seen a
check to all mirth, she could have been entertained by Mrs. Jennings's
endeavours to cure a disappointment in love, by a variety of
sweetmeats and olives, and a good fire. As soon, however, as the
consciousness of all this was forced by continual repetition on
Marianne, she could stay no longer. With a hasty exclamation of
Misery, and a sign to her sister not to follow her, she directly got
up and hurried out of the room.

"Poor soul!" cried Mrs. Jennings, as soon as she was gone, "how it
grieves me to see her! And I declare if she is not gone away without
finishing her wine! And the dried cherries too! Lord! nothing seems to
do her any good. I am sure if I knew of any thing she would like, I
would send all over the town for it. Well, it is the oddest thing to
me, that a man should use such a pretty girl so ill! But when there
is plenty of money on one side, and next to none on the other, Lord
bless you! they care no more about such things!"

"The lady then,--Miss Grey I think you called her,--is very rich?"

"Fifty thousand pounds, my dear. Did you ever see her? a smart,
stylish girl they say, but not handsome. I remember her aunt very
well, Biddy Henshawe; she married a very wealthy man. But the family
are all rich together. Fifty thousand pounds! and by all accounts, it
won't come before it's wanted; for they say he is all to pieces. No
wonder! dashing about with his curricle and hunters! Well, it don't
signify talking; but when a young man, be who he will, comes and makes
love to a pretty girl, and promises marriage, he has no business to
fly off from his word only because he grows poor, and a richer girl is
ready to have him. Why don't he, in such a case, sell his horses, let
his house, turn off his servants, and make a thorough reform at once?
I warrant you, Miss Marianne would have been ready to wait till
matters came round. But that won't do nowadays; nothing in the way
of pleasure can ever be given up by the young men of this age."

"Do you know what kind of a girl Miss Grey is? Is she said to be
amiable?"

"I never heard any harm of her; indeed I hardly ever heard her
mentioned; except that Mrs. Taylor did say this morning, that one day
Miss Walker hinted to her, that she believed Mr. and Mrs. Ellison
would not be sorry to have Miss Grey married, for she and Mrs. Ellison
could never agree."

"And who are the Ellisons?"

"Her guardians, my dear. But now she is of age and may choose for
herself; and a pretty choice she has made!--What now," after pausing a
moment, "your poor sister is gone to her own room, I suppose, to moan
by herself. Is there nothing one can get to comfort her? Poor dear, it
seems quite cruel to let her be alone. Well, by and by we shall have a
few friends, and that will amuse her a little. What shall we play at?
She hates whist I know; but is there no round game she cares for?"

"Dear ma'am, this kindness is quite unnecessary. Marianne, I dare say,
will not leave her room again this evening. I shall persuade her if I
can to go early to bed, for I am sure she wants rest."

"Aye, I believe that will be best for her. Let her name her own
supper, and go to bed. Lord! no wonder she has been looking so bad and
so cast down this last week or two, for this matter I suppose has been
hanging over her head as long as that. And so the letter that came
today finished it! Poor soul! I am sure if I had had a notion of it, I
would not have joked her about it for all my money. But then you know,
how should I guess such a thing? I made sure of its being nothing but
a common love letter, and you know young people like to be laughed at
about them. Lord! how concerned Sir John and my daughters will be when
they hear it! If I had my senses about me I might have called in
Conduit Street in my way home, and told them of it. But I shall see
them to-morrow."

"It would be unnecessary I am sure, for you to caution Mrs. Palmer and
Sir John against ever naming Mr. Willoughby, or making the slightest
allusion to what has passed, before my sister. Their own good-nature
must point out to them the real cruelty of appearing to know any thing
about it when she is present; and the less that may ever be said to
myself on the subject, the more my feelings will be spared, as you my
dear madam will easily believe."

"Oh! Lord! yes, that I do indeed. It must be terrible for you to hear
it talked of; and as for your sister, I am sure I would not mention a
word about it to her for the world. You saw I did not all dinner time.
No more would Sir John, nor my daughters, for they are all very
thoughtful and considerate; especially if I give them a hint, as I
certainly will. For my part, I think the less that is said about such
things, the better, the sooner 'tis blown over and forgot. And what
does talking ever do you know?"

"In this affair it can only do harm; more so perhaps than in many
cases of a similar kind, for it has been attended by circumstances
which, for the sake of every one concerned in it, make it unfit to
become the public conversation. I must do _this_ justice to Mr.
Willoughby--he has broken no positive engagement with my sister."

"Law, my dear! Don't pretend to defend him. No positive engagement
indeed! after taking her all over Allenham House, and fixing on the
very rooms they were to live in hereafter!"

Elinor, for her sister's sake, could not press the subject farther,
and she hoped it was not required of her for Willoughby's; since,
though Marianne might lose much, he could gain very little by the
enforcement of the real truth. After a short silence on both sides,
Mrs. Jennings, with all her natural hilarity, burst forth again.

"Well, my dear, 'tis a true saying about an ill wind, for it will be
all the better for Colonel Brandon. He will have her at last; aye,
that he will. Mind me, now, if they an't married by Mid-summer. Lord!
how he'll chuckle over this news! I hope he will come tonight. It will
be all to one a better match for your sister. Two thousand a year
without debt or drawback--except the little love-child, indeed; aye, I
had forgot her; but she may be 'prenticed out at a small cost, and
then what does it signify? Delaford is a nice place, I can tell you;
exactly what I call a nice old fashioned place, full of comforts and
conveniences; quite shut in with great garden walls that are covered
with the best fruit-trees in the country; and such a mulberry tree in
one corner! Lord! how Charlotte and I did stuff the only time we were
there! Then, there is a dovecote, some delightful stew-ponds, and a
very pretty canal; and every thing, in short, that one could wish for;
and, moreover, it is close to the church, and only a quarter of a mile
from the turnpike-road, so 'tis never dull, for if you only go and sit
up in an old yew arbour behind the house, you may see all the
carriages that pass along. Oh! 'tis a nice place! A butcher hard by in
the village, and the parsonage-house within a stone's throw. To my
fancy, a thousand times prettier than Barton Park, where they are
forced to send three miles for their meat, and have not a neighbour
nearer than your mother. Well, I shall spirit up the Colonel as soon
as I can. One shoulder of mutton, you know, drives another down. If we
_can_ but put Willoughby out of her head!"

"Ay, if we can do that, Ma'am," said Elinor, "we shall do very well
with or without Colonel Brandon." And then rising, she went away to
join Marianne, whom she found, as she expected, in her own room,
leaning, in silent misery, over the small remains of a fire, which,
till Elinor's entrance, had been her only light.

"You had better leave me," was all the notice that her sister received
from her.

"I will leave you," said Elinor, "if you will go to bed." But this,
from the momentary perverseness of impatient suffering, she at first
refused to do. Her sister's earnest, though gentle persuasion,
however, soon softened her to compliance, and Elinor saw her lay her
aching head on the pillow, and as she hoped, in a way to get some
quiet rest before she left her.

In the drawing-room, whither she then repaired, she was soon joined by
Mrs. Jennings, with a wine-glass, full of something, in her hand.

"My dear," said she, entering, "I have just recollected that I have
some of the finest old Constantia wine in the house that ever was
tasted, so I have brought a glass of it for your sister. My poor
husband! how fond he was of it! Whenever he had a touch of his old
colicky gout, he said it did him more good than any thing else in the
world. Do take it to your sister."

"Dear Ma'am," replied Elinor, smiling at the difference of the
complaints for which it was recommended, "how good you are! But I have
just left Marianne in bed, and, I hope, almost asleep; and as I think
nothing will be of so much service to her as rest, if you will give me
leave, I will drink the wine myself."

Mrs. Jennings, though regretting that she had not been five minutes
earlier, was satisfied with the compromise; and Elinor, as she
swallowed the chief of it, reflected, that though its effects on a
colicky gout were, at present, of little importance to her, its
healing powers, on a disappointed heart might be as reasonably tried
on herself as on her sister.

Colonel Brandon came in while the party were at tea, and by his manner
of looking round the room for Marianne, Elinor immediately fancied
that he neither expected nor wished to see her there, and, in short,
that he was already aware of what occasioned her absence. Mrs.
Jennings was not struck by the same thought; for soon after his
entrance, she walked across the room to the tea-table where Elinor
presided, and whispered, "The Colonel looks as grave as ever you see.
He knows nothing of it; do tell him, my dear."

[Illustration: "_How fond he was of it!_"]

He shortly afterwards drew a chair close to her's, and, with a look
which perfectly assured her of his good information, inquired after
her sister.

"Marianne is not well," said she. "She has been indisposed all day,
and we have persuaded her to go to bed."

"Perhaps, then," he hesitatingly replied, "what I heard this morning
may be--there may be more truth in it than I could believe possible at
first."

"What did you hear?"

"That a gentleman, whom I had reason to think--in short, that a man,
whom I _knew_ to be engaged--but how shall I tell you? If you know it
already, as surely you must, I may be spared."

"You mean," answered Elinor, with forced calmness, "Mr. Willoughby's
marriage with Miss Grey. Yes, we _do_ know it all. This seems to have
been a day of general elucidation, for this very morning first
unfolded it to us. Mr. Willoughby is unfathomable! Where did you hear
it?"

"In a stationer's shop in Pall Mall, where I had business. Two ladies
were waiting for their carriage, and one of them was giving the other
an account of the intended match, in a voice so little attempting
concealment, that it was impossible for me not to hear all. The name
of Willoughby, John Willoughby, frequently repeated, first caught my
attention; and what followed was a positive assertion that every thing
was now finally settled respecting his marriage with Miss Grey--it was
no longer to be a secret--it would take place even within a few weeks,
with many particulars of preparations and other matters. One thing,
especially, I remember, because it served to identify the man still
more:--as soon as the ceremony was over, they were to go to Combe
Magna, his seat in Somersetshire. My astonishment!--but it would be
impossible to describe what I felt. The communicative lady I learnt,
on inquiry,--for I stayed in the shop till they were gone,--was a Mrs.
Ellison, and that, as I have been since informed, is the name of Miss
Grey's guardian."

"It is. But have you likewise heard that Miss Grey has fifty thousand
pounds? In that, if in any thing, we may find an explanation."

"It may be so; but Willoughby is capable--at least I think--" He
stopped a moment; then added in a voice which seemed to distrust
itself, "And your sister,--how did she,--"

"Her sufferings have been very severe. I have only to hope that they
may be proportionately short. It has been, it is a most cruel
affliction. Till yesterday, I believe, she never doubted his regard;
and even now, perhaps--but _I_ am almost convinced that he never was
really attached to her. He has been very deceitful! and, in some
points, there seems a hardness of heart about him."

"Ah!" said Colonel Brandon, "there is, indeed! But your sister does
not--I think you said so--she does not consider quite as you do?"

"You know her disposition, and may believe how eagerly she would still
justify him if she could."

He made no answer; and soon afterwards, by the removal of the
tea-things, and the arrangement of the card parties, the subject was
necessarily dropped. Mrs. Jennings, who had watched them with pleasure
while they were talking, and who expected to see the effect of Miss
Dashwood's communication, in such an instantaneous gaiety on Colonel
Brandon's side, as might have become a man in the bloom of youth, of
hope and happiness, saw him, with amazement, remain the whole evening
more serious and thoughtful than usual.




CHAPTER XXXI


From a night of more sleep than she had expected, Marianne awoke the
next morning to the same consciousness of misery in which she had
closed her eyes.

Elinor encouraged her as much as possible to talk of what she felt;
and before breakfast was ready, they had gone through the subject
again and again; and with the same steady conviction and affectionate
counsel on Elinor's side, the same impetuous feelings and varying
opinions on Marianne's, as before. Sometimes she could believe
Willoughby to be as unfortunate and as innocent as herself, and at
others, lost every consolation in the impossibility of acquitting him.
At one moment she was absolutely indifferent to the observation of all
the world, at another she would seclude herself from it for ever, and
at a third could resist it with energy. In one thing, however, she
was uniform, when it came to the point, in avoiding, where it was
possible, the presence of Mrs. Jennings, and in a determined silence
when obliged to endure it. Her heart was hardened against the belief
of Mrs. Jennings's entering into her sorrows with any compassion.

"No, no, no, it cannot be," she cried; "she cannot feel. Her kindness
is not sympathy; her good-nature is not tenderness. All that she wants
is gossip, and she only likes me now because I supply it."

Elinor had not needed this to be assured of the injustice to which her
sister was often led in her opinion of others, by the irritable
refinement of her own mind, and the too great importance placed by her
on the delicacies of a strong sensibility, and the graces of a
polished manner. Like half the rest of the world, if more than half
there be that are clever and good, Marianne, with excellent abilities
and an excellent disposition, was neither reasonable nor candid. She
expected from other people the same opinions and feelings as her own,
and she judged of their motives by the immediate effect of their
actions on herself. Thus a circumstance occurred, while the sisters
were together in their own room after breakfast, which sunk the heart
of Mrs. Jennings still lower in her estimation; because, through her
own weakness, it chanced to prove a source of fresh pain to herself,
though Mrs. Jennings was governed in it by an impulse of the utmost
good-will.

With a letter in her outstretched hand, and countenance gaily smiling,
from the persuasion of bringing comfort, she entered their room,
saying--

"Now, my dear, I bring you something that I am sure will do you good."

Marianne heard enough. In one moment her imagination placed before her
a letter from Willoughby, full of tenderness and contrition,
explanatory of all that had passed, satisfactory, convincing; and
instantly followed by Willoughby himself, rushing eagerly into the
room to enforce, at her feet, by the eloquence of his eyes, the
assurances of his letter. The work of one moment was destroyed by the
next. The hand writing of her mother, never till then unwelcome, was
before her; and, in the acuteness of the disappointment which followed
such an ecstasy of more than hope, she felt as if, till that instant,
she had never suffered.

The cruelty of Mrs. Jennings, no language, within her reach in her
moments of happiest eloquence, could have expressed; and now she could
reproach her only by the tears which streamed from her eyes with
passionate violence;--a reproach, however, so entirely lost on its
object, that after many expressions of pity, she withdrew, still
referring her to the letter of comfort. But the letter, when she was
calm enough to read it, brought little comfort. Willoughby filled
every page. Her mother, still confident of their engagement, and
relying as warmly as ever on his constancy, had only been roused by
Elinor's application, to entreat from Marianne greater openness
towards them both; and this, with such tenderness towards her, such
affection for Willoughby, and such a conviction of their future
happiness in each other, that she wept with agony through the whole of
it.

All her impatience to be at home again now returned; her mother was
dearer to her than ever; dearer through the very excess of her
mistaken confidence in Willoughby, and she was wildly urgent to be
gone. Elinor, unable herself to determine whether it were better for
Marianne to be in London or at Barton, offered no counsel of her own
except of patience till their mother's wishes could be known; and at
length she obtained her sister's consent to wait for that knowledge.

Mrs. Jennings left them earlier than usual; for she could not be easy
till the Middletons and Palmers were able to grieve as much as
herself; and positively refusing Elinor's offered attendance, went out
alone for the rest of the morning. Elinor, with a very heavy heart,
aware of the pain she was going to communicate, and perceiving, by
Marianne's letter, how ill she had succeeded in laying any foundation
for it, then sat down to write her mother an account of what had
passed, and entreat her directions for the future; while Marianne, who
came into the drawing-room on Mrs. Jennings's going away, remained
fixed at the table where Elinor wrote, watching the advancement of her
pen, grieving over her for the hardship of such a task, and grieving
still more fondly over its effect on her mother.

In this manner they had continued about a quarter of an hour, when
Marianne, whose nerves could not then bear any sudden noise, was
startled by a rap at the door.

"Who can this be?" cried Elinor. "So early too! I thought we _had_
been safe."

Marianne moved to the window--

"It is Colonel Brandon!" said she, with vexation. "We are never safe
from _him._"

"He will not come in, as Mrs. Jennings is from home."

"I will not trust to _that_," retreating to her own room. "A man who
has nothing to do with his own time has no conscience in his intrusion
on that of others."

The event proved her conjecture right, though it was founded on
injustice and error; for Colonel Brandon _did_ come in; and Elinor,
who was convinced that solicitude for Marianne brought him thither,
and who saw _that_ solicitude in his disturbed and melancholy look,
and in his anxious though brief inquiry after her, could not forgive
her sister for esteeming him so lightly.

"I met Mrs. Jennings in Bond Street," said he, after the first
salutation, "and she encouraged me to come on; and I was the more
easily encouraged, because I thought it probable that I might find you
alone, which I was very desirous of doing. My object--my wish--my sole
wish in desiring it--I hope, I believe it is--is to be a means of
giving comfort;--no, I must not say comfort--not present comfort--but
conviction, lasting conviction to your sister's mind. My regard for
her, for yourself, for your mother--will you allow me to prove it, by
relating some circumstances which nothing but a _very_ sincere
regard--nothing but an earnest desire of being useful--I think I am
justified--though where so many hours have been spent in convincing
myself that I am right, is there not some reason to fear I may be
wrong?" He stopped.

"I understand you," said Elinor. "You have something to tell me of Mr.
Willoughby, that will open his character farther. Your telling it will
be the greatest act of friendship that can be shown Marianne. _My_
gratitude will be insured immediately by any information tending to
that end, and _hers_ must be gained by it in time. Pray, pray let me
hear it."

"You shall; and, to be brief, when I quitted Barton last October,--but
this will give you no idea--I must go farther back. You will find me a
very awkward narrator, Miss Dashwood; I hardly know where to begin. A
short account of myself, I believe, will be necessary, and it _shall_
be a short one. On such a subject," sighing heavily, "can I have
little temptation to be diffuse."

He stopt a moment for recollection, and then, with another sigh, went
on.

"You have probably entirely forgotten a conversation--(it is not to be
supposed that it could make any impression on you)--a conversation
between us one evening at Barton Park--it was the evening of a
dance--in which I alluded to a lady I had once known, as resembling,
in some measure, your sister Marianne."

"Indeed," answered Elinor, "I have _not_ forgotten it." He looked
pleased by this remembrance, and added--

"If I am not deceived by the uncertainty, the partiality of tender
recollection, there is a very strong resemblance between them, as well
in mind as person. The same warmth of heart, the same eagerness of
fancy and spirits. This lady was one of my nearest relations, an
orphan from her infancy, and under the guardianship of my father. Our
ages were nearly the same, and from our earliest years we were
playfellows and friends. I cannot remember the time when I did not
love Eliza; and my affection for her, as we grew up, was such, as
perhaps, judging from my present forlorn and cheerless gravity, you
might think me incapable of having ever felt. Her's, for me, was, I
believe, fervent as the attachment of your sister to Mr. Willoughby
and it was, though from a different cause, no less unfortunate. At
seventeen she was lost to me for ever. She was married--married
against her inclination to my brother. Her fortune was large, and our
family estate much encumbered. And this, I fear, is all that can be
said for the conduct of one, who was at once her uncle and guardian.
My brother did not deserve her; he did not even love her. I had hoped
that her regard for me would support her under any difficulty, and for
some time it did; but at last the misery of her situation, for she
experienced great unkindness, overcame all her resolution, and though
she had promised me that nothing--but how blindly I relate! I have
never told you how this was brought on. We were within a few hours of
eloping together for Scotland. The treachery, or the folly, of my
cousin's maid betrayed us. I was banished to the house of a relation
far distant, and she was allowed no liberty, no society, no amusement,
till my father's point was gained. I had depended on her fortitude too
far, and the blow was a severe one, but had her marriage been happy,
so young as I then was, a few months must have reconciled me to it,
or at least I should not have now to lament it. This however was not
the case. My brother had no regard for her; his pleasures were not
what they ought to have been, and from the first he treated her
unkindly. The consequence of this, upon a mind so young, so lively, so
inexperienced as Mrs. Brandon's, was but too natural. She resigned
herself at first to all the misery of her situation; and happy had it
been if she had not lived to overcome those regrets which the
remembrance of me occasioned. But can we wonder that, with such a
husband to provoke inconstancy, and without a friend to advise or
restrain her (for my father lived only a few months after their
marriage, and I was with my regiment in the East Indies) she should
fall? Had I remained in England, perhaps--but I meant to promote the
happiness of both by removing from her for years, and for that purpose
had procured my exchange. The shock which her marriage had given me,"
he continued, in a voice of great agitation, "was of trifling
weight--was nothing to what I felt when I heard, about two years
afterwards, of her divorce. It was _that_ which threw this
gloom,--even now the recollection of what I suffered--"

He could say no more, and rising hastily walked for a few minutes
about the room. Elinor, affected by his relation, and still more by
his distress, could not speak. He saw her concern, and coming to her,
took her hand, pressed it, and kissed it with grateful respect. A few
minutes more of silent exertion enabled him to proceed with composure.

"It was nearly three years after this unhappy period before I returned
to England. My first care, when I _did_ arrive, was of course to seek
for her; but the search was as fruitless as it was melancholy. I could
not trace her beyond her first seducer, and there was every reason to
fear that she had removed from him only to sink deeper in a life of
sin. Her legal allowance was not adequate to her fortune, nor
sufficient for her comfortable maintenance, and I learnt from my
brother that the power of receiving it had been made over some months
before to another person. He imagined, and calmly could he imagine it,
that her extravagance, and consequent distress, had obliged her to
dispose of it for some immediate relief. At last, however, and after I
had been six months in England, I _did_ find her. Regard for a former
servant of my own, who had since fallen into misfortune, carried me
to visit him in a spunging-house, where he was confined for debt; and
there, in the same house, under a similar confinement, was my
unfortunate sister. So altered--so faded--worn down by acute suffering
of every kind! hardly could I believe the melancholy and sickly figure
before me, to be the remains of the lovely, blooming, healthful girl,
on whom I had once doted. What I endured in so beholding her--but I
have no right to wound your feelings by attempting to describe it--I
have pained you too much already. That she was, to all appearance, in
the last stage of a consumption, was--yes, in such a situation it was
my greatest comfort. Life could do nothing for her, beyond giving time
for a better preparation for death; and that was given. I saw her
placed in comfortable lodgings, and under proper attendants; I visited
her every day during the rest of her short life: I was with her in her
last moments."

Again he stopped to recover himself; and Elinor spoke her feelings in
an exclamation of tender concern, at the fate of his unfortunate
friend.

"Your sister, I hope, cannot be offended," said he, "by the
resemblance I have fancied between her and my poor disgraced relation.
Their fates, their fortunes, cannot be the same; and had the natural
sweet disposition of the one been guarded by a firmer mind, or a
happier marriage, she might have been all that you will live to see
the other be. But to what does all this lead? I seem to have been
distressing you for nothing. Ah! Miss Dashwood--a subject such as
this--untouched for fourteen years--it is dangerous to handle it at
all! I _will_ be more collected--more concise. She left to my care her
only child, a little girl, the offspring of her first guilty
connection, who was then about three years old. She loved the child,
and had always kept it with her. It was a valued, a precious trust to
me; and gladly would I have discharged it in the strictest sense, by
watching over her education myself, had the nature of our situations
allowed it; but I had no family, no home; and my little Eliza was
therefore placed at school. I saw her there whenever I could, and
after the death of my brother, (which happened about five years ago,
and which left to me the possession of the family property,) she
visited me at Delaford. I called her a distant relation; but I am
well aware that I have in general been suspected of a much nearer
connection with her. It is now three years ago (she had just reached
her fourteenth year,) that I removed her from school, to place her
under the care of a very respectable woman, residing in Dorsetshire,
who had the charge of four or five other girls of about the same time
of life; and for two years I had every reason to be pleased with her
situation. But last February, almost a twelvemonth back, she suddenly
disappeared. I had allowed her, (imprudently, as it has since turned
out,) at her earnest desire, to go to Bath with one of her young
friends, who was attending her father there for his health. I knew him
to be a very good sort of man, and I thought well of his
daughter--better than she deserved, for, with a most obstinate and
ill-judged secrecy, she would tell nothing, would give no clue, though
she certainly knew all. He, her father, a well-meaning, but not a
quick-sighted man, could really, I believe, give no information; for
he had been generally confined to the house, while the girls were
ranging over the town and making what acquaintance they chose; and he
tried to convince me, as thoroughly as he was convinced himself, of
his daughter's being entirely unconcerned in the business. In short, I
could learn nothing but that she was gone; all the rest, for eight
long months, was left to conjecture. What I thought, what I feared,
may be imagined; and what I suffered too."

"Good heavens!" cried Elinor, "could it be--could Willoughby!"--

"The first news that reached me of her," he continued, "came in a
letter from herself, last October. It was forwarded to me from
Delaford, and I received it on the very morning of our intended party
to Whitwell; and this was the reason of my leaving Barton so suddenly,
which I am sure must at the time have appeared strange to every body,
and which I believe gave offence to some. Little did Mr. Willoughby
imagine, I suppose, when his looks censured me for incivility in
breaking up the party, that I was called away to the relief of one
whom he had made poor and miserable; but _had_ he known it, what would
it have availed? Would he have been less gay or less happy in the
smiles of your sister? No, he had already done that, which no man who
_can_ feel for another would do. He had left the girl whose youth and
innocence he had seduced, in a situation of the utmost distress, with
no creditable home, no help, no friends, ignorant of his address! He
had left her, promising to return; he neither returned, nor wrote, nor
relieved her."

"This is beyond every thing!" exclaimed Elinor.

"His character is now before you; expensive, dissipated, and worse
than both. Knowing all this, as I have now known it many weeks, guess
what I must have felt on seeing your sister as fond of him as ever,
and on being assured that she was to marry him: guess what I must have
felt for all your sakes. When I came to you last week and found you
alone, I came determined to know the truth; though irresolute what to
do when it _was_ known. My behaviour must have seemed strange to you
then; but now you will comprehend it. To suffer you all to be so
deceived; to see your sister--but what could I do? I had no hope of
interfering with success; and sometimes I thought your sister's
influence might yet reclaim him. But now, after such dishonorable
usage, who can tell what were his designs on her. Whatever they may
have been, however, she may now, and hereafter doubtless _will_, turn
with gratitude towards her own condition, when she compares it with
that of my poor Eliza, when she considers the wretched and hopeless
situation of this poor girl, and pictures her to herself, with an
affection for him so strong, still as strong as her own, and with a
mind tormented by self-reproach, which must attend her through life.
Surely this comparison must have its use with her. She will feel her
own sufferings to be nothing. They proceed from no misconduct, and can
bring no disgrace. On the contrary, every friend must be made still
more her friend by them. Concern for her unhappiness, and respect for
her fortitude under it, must strengthen every attachment. Use your own
discretion, however, in communicating to her what I have told you. You
must know best what will be its effect; but had I not seriously, and
from my heart believed it might be of service, might lessen her
regrets, I would not have suffered myself to trouble you with this
account of my family afflictions, with a recital which may seem to
have been intended to raise myself at the expense of others."

Elinor's thanks followed this speech with grateful earnestness;
attended too with the assurance of her expecting material advantage
to Marianne, from the communication of what had passed.

"I have been more pained," said she, "by her endeavors to acquit him
than by all the rest; for it irritates her mind more than the most
perfect conviction of his unworthiness can do. Now, though at first
she will suffer much, I am sure she will soon become easier. Have
you," she continued, after a short silence, "ever seen Mr. Willoughby
since you left him at Barton?"

"Yes," he replied gravely, "once I have. One meeting was unavoidable."

Elinor, startled by his manner, looked at him anxiously, saying--

"What? have you met him to--"

"I could meet him no other way. Eliza had confessed to me, though most
reluctantly, the name of her lover; and when he returned to town,
which was within a fortnight after myself, we met by appointment, he
to defend, I to punish his conduct. We returned unwounded, and the
meeting, therefore, never got abroad."

Elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of this; but to a man and a
soldier she presumed not to censure it.

"Such," said Colonel Brandon, after a pause, "has been the unhappy
resemblance between the fate of mother and daughter! and so
imperfectly have I discharged my trust!"

"Is she still in town?"

"No; as soon as she recovered from her lying-in, for I found her near
her delivery, I removed her and her child into the country, and there
she remains."

Recollecting, soon afterwards, that he was probably dividing Elinor
from her sister, he put an end to his visit, receiving from her again
the same grateful acknowledgments, and leaving her full of compassion
and esteem for him.




CHAPTER XXXII


When the particulars of this conversation were repeated by Miss
Dashwood to her sister, as they very soon were, the effect on her was
not entirely such as the former had hoped to see. Not that Marianne
appeared to distrust the truth of any part of it, for she listened to
it all with the most steady and submissive attention, made neither
objection nor remark, attempted no vindication of Willoughby, and
seemed to show by her tears that she felt it to be impossible. But
though this behaviour assured Elinor that the conviction of this guilt
_was_ carried home to her mind, though she saw with satisfaction the
effect of it, in her no longer avoiding Colonel Brandon when he
called, in her speaking to him, even voluntarily speaking, with a kind
of compassionate respect, and though she saw her spirits less
violently irritated than before, she did not see her less wretched.
Her mind did become settled, but it was settled in a gloomy dejection.
She felt the loss of Willoughby's character yet more heavily than she
had felt the loss of his heart; his seduction and desertion of Miss
Williams, the misery of that poor girl, and the doubt of what his
designs might _once_ have been on herself, preyed altogether so much
on her spirits, that she could not bring herself to speak of what she
felt even to Elinor; and, brooding over her sorrows in silence, gave
more pain to her sister than could have been communicated by the most
open and most frequent confession of them.

To give the feelings or the language of Mrs. Dashwood on receiving and
answering Elinor's letter would be only to give a repetition of what
her daughters had already felt and said; of a disappointment hardly
less painful than Marianne's, and an indignation even greater than
Elinor's. Long letters from her, quickly succeeding each other,
arrived to tell all that she suffered and thought; to express her
anxious solicitude for Marianne, and entreat she would bear up with
fortitude under this misfortune. Bad indeed must the nature of
Marianne's affliction be, when her mother could talk of fortitude!
mortifying and humiliating must be the origin of those regrets, which
_she_ could wish her not to indulge!

Against the interest of her own individual comfort, Mrs. Dashwood had
determined that it would be better for Marianne to be any where, at
that time, than at Barton, where every thing within her view would be
bringing back the past in the strongest and most afflicting manner, by
constantly placing Willoughby before her, such as she had always seen
him there. She recommended it to her daughters, therefore, by all
means not to shorten their visit to Mrs. Jennings; the length of
which, though never exactly fixed, had been expected by all to
comprise at least five or six weeks. A variety of occupations, of
objects, and of company, which could not be procured at Barton, would
be inevitable there, and might yet, she hoped, cheat Marianne, at
times, into some interest beyond herself, and even into some
amusement, much as the ideas of both might now be spurned by her.

From all danger of seeing Willoughby again, her mother considered her
to be at least equally safe in town as in the country, since his
acquaintance must now be dropped by all who called themselves her
friends. Design could never bring them in each other's way: negligence
could never leave them exposed to a surprise; and chance had less in
its favour in the crowd of London than even in the retirement of
Barton, where it might force him before her while paying that visit at
Allenham on his marriage, which Mrs. Dashwood, from foreseeing at
first as a probable event, had brought herself to expect as a certain
one.

She had yet another reason for wishing her children to remain where
they were; a letter from her son-in-law had told her that he and his
wife were to be in town before the middle of February, and she judged
it right that they should sometimes see their brother.

Marianne had promised to be guided by her mother's opinion, and she
submitted to it therefore without opposition, though it proved
perfectly different from what she wished and expected, though she felt
it to be entirely wrong, formed on mistaken grounds, and that by
requiring her longer continuance in London it deprived her of the only
possible alleviation of her wretchedness, the personal sympathy of her
mother, and doomed her to such society and such scenes as must prevent
her ever knowing a moment's rest.

But it was a matter of great consolation to her, that what brought
evil to herself would bring good to her sister; and Elinor, on the
other hand, suspecting that it would not be in her power to avoid
Edward entirely, comforted herself by thinking, that though their
longer stay would therefore militate against her own happiness, it
would be better for Marianne than an immediate return into Devonshire.

Her carefulness in guarding her sister from ever hearing Willoughby's
name mentioned, was not thrown away. Marianne, though without knowing
it herself, reaped all its advantage; for neither Mrs. Jennings, nor
Sir John, nor even Mrs. Palmer herself, ever spoke of him before her.
Elinor wished that the same forbearance could have extended towards
herself, but that was impossible, and she was obliged to listen day
after day to the indignation of them all.

Sir John, could not have thought it possible. "A man of whom he had
always had such reason to think well! Such a good-natured fellow! He
did not believe there was a bolder rider in England! It was an
unaccountable business. He wished him at the devil with all his heart.
He would not speak another word to him, meet him where he might, for
all the world! No, not if it were to be by the side of Barton covert,
and they were kept watching for two hours together. Such a scoundrel
of a fellow! such a deceitful dog! It was only the last time they met
that he had offered him one of Folly's puppies! and this was the end
of it!"

Mrs. Palmer, in her way, was equally angry. "She was determined to
drop his acquaintance immediately, and she was very thankful that she
had never been acquainted with him at all. She wished with all her
heart Combe Magna was not so near Cleveland; but it did not signify,
for it was a great deal too far off to visit; she hated him so much
that she was resolved never to mention his name again, and she should
tell everybody she saw, how good-for-nothing he was."

The rest of Mrs. Palmer's sympathy was shown in procuring all the
particulars in her power of the approaching marriage, and
communicating them to Elinor. She could soon tell at what coachmaker's
the new carriage was building, by what painter Mr. Willoughby's
portrait was drawn, and at what warehouse Miss Grey's clothes might be
seen.

[Illustration: _Offered him one of Folly's puppies._]

The calm and polite unconcern of Lady Middleton on the occasion was a
happy relief to Elinor's spirits, oppressed as they often were by
the clamorous kindness of the others. It was a great comfort to her to
be sure of exciting no interest in _one_ person at least among their
circle of friends: a great comfort to know that there was _one_ who
would meet her without feeling any curiosity after particulars, or any
anxiety for her sister's health.

Every qualification is raised at times, by the circumstances of the
moment, to more than its real value; and she was sometimes worried
down by officious condolence to rate good-breeding as more
indispensable to comfort than good-nature.

Lady Middleton expressed her sense of the affair about once every day,
or twice, if the subject occurred very often, by saying, "It is very
shocking, indeed!" and by the means of this continual though gentle
vent, was able not only to see the Miss Dashwoods from the first
without the smallest emotion, but very soon to see them without
recollecting a word of the matter; and having thus supported the
dignity of her own sex, and spoken her decided censure of what was
wrong in the other, she thought herself at liberty to attend to the
interest of her own assemblies, and therefore determined (though
rather against the opinion of Sir John) that as Mrs. Willoughby would
at once be a woman of elegance and fortune, to leave her card with her
as soon as she married.

Colonel Brandon's delicate, unobtrusive enquiries were never unwelcome
to Miss Dashwood. He had abundantly earned the privilege of intimate
discussion of her sister's disappointment, by the friendly zeal with
which he had endeavoured to soften it, and they always conversed with
confidence. His chief reward for the painful exertion of disclosing
past sorrows and present humiliations, was given in the pitying eye
with which Marianne sometimes observed him, and the gentleness of her
voice whenever (though it did not often happen) she was obliged, or
could oblige herself to speak to him. _These_ assured him that his
exertion had produced an increase of good-will towards himself, and
_these_ gave Elinor hopes of its being farther augmented hereafter;
but Mrs. Jennings, who knew nothing of all this, who knew only that
the Colonel continued as grave as ever, and that she could neither
prevail on him to make the offer himself, nor commission her to make
it for him, began, at the end of two days, to think that, instead of
Mid-summer, they would not be married till Michaelmas, and by the end
of a week that it would not be a match at all. The good understanding
between the Colonel and Miss Dashwood seemed rather to declare that
the honours of the mulberry-tree, the canal, and the yew arbour, would
all be made over to _her_; and Mrs. Jennings had, for some time ceased
to think at all of Mrs. Ferrars.

Early in February, within a fortnight from the receipt of Willoughby's
letter, Elinor had the painful office of informing her sister that he
was married. She had taken care to have the intelligence conveyed to
herself, as soon as it was known that the ceremony was over, as she
was desirous that Marianne should not receive the first notice of it
from the public papers, which she saw her eagerly examining every
morning.

She received the news with resolute composure; made no observation on
it, and at first shed no tears; but after a short time they would
burst out, and for the rest of the day, she was in a state hardly less
pitiable than when she first learnt to expect the event.

The Willoughbys left town as soon as they were married; and Elinor now
hoped, as there could be no danger of her seeing either of them, to
prevail on her sister, who had never yet left the house since the blow
first fell, to go out again by degrees as she had done before.

About this time the two Miss Steeles, lately arrived at their cousin's
house in Bartlett's Buildings, Holborn, presented themselves again
before their more grand relations in Conduit and Berkeley Streets; and
were welcomed by them all with great cordiality.

Elinor only was sorry to see them. Their presence always gave her
pain, and she hardly knew how to make a very gracious return to the
overpowering delight of Lucy in finding her _still_ in town.

"I should have been quite disappointed if I had not found you here
_still_," said she repeatedly, with a strong emphasis on the word.
"But I always thought I _should_ I was almost sure you would not leave
London yet awhile; though you _told_ me, you know, at Barton, that you
should not stay above a _month._ But I thought, at the time, that you
would most likely change your mind when it came to the point. It would
have been such a great pity to have went away before your brother and
sister came. And now to be sure you will be in no _hurry_ to be gone.
I am amazingly glad you did not keep to _your word._"

Elinor perfectly understood her, and was forced to use all her
self-command to make it appear that she did _not._

"Well, my dear," said Mrs. Jennings, "and how did you travel?"

"Not in the stage, I assure you," replied Miss Steele, with quick
exultation; "we came post all the way, and had a very smart beau to
attend us. Dr. Davies was coming to town, and so we thought we'd join
him in a post-chaise; and he behaved very genteelly, and paid ten or
twelve shillings more than we did."

"Oh, oh!" cried Mrs. Jennings; "very pretty, indeed! and the Doctor is
a single man, I warrant you."

"There now," said Miss Steele, affectedly simpering, "everybody laughs
at me so about the Doctor, and I cannot think why. My cousins say they
are sure I have made a conquest; but for my part I declare I never
think about him from one hour's end to another. 'Lord! here comes your
beau, Nancy,' my cousin said t'other day, when she saw him crossing
the street to the house. My beau, indeed! said I--I cannot think who
you mean. The Doctor is no beau of mine."

"Aye, aye, that is very pretty talking--but it won't do--the Doctor is
the man, I see."

"No, indeed!" replied her cousin, with affected earnestness, "and I
beg you will contradict it, if you ever hear it talked of."

Mrs. Jennings directly gave her the gratifying assurance that she
certainly would _not_, and Miss Steele was made completely happy.

"I suppose you will go and stay with your brother and sister, Miss
Dashwood, when they come to town," said Lucy, returning, after a
cessation of hostile hints, to the charge.

"No, I do not think we shall."

"Oh, yes, I dare say you will."

Elinor would not humour her by farther opposition.

"What a charming thing it is that Mrs. Dashwood can spare you both for
so long a time together!"

"Long a time, indeed!" interposed Mrs. Jennings. "Why, their visit is
but just begun!"

[Illustration: _A very smart beau._]

Lucy was silenced.

"I am sorry we cannot see your sister, Miss Dashwood," said Miss
Steele. "I am sorry she is not well--" for Marianne had left the room
on their arrival.

"You are very good. My sister will be equally sorry to miss the
pleasure of seeing you; but she has been very much plagued lately with
nervous head-aches, which make her unfit for company or conversation."

"Oh, dear, that is a great pity! but such old friends as Lucy and
me!--I think she might see _us_; and I am sure we would not speak a
word."

Elinor, with great civility, declined the proposal. Her sister was
perhaps laid down upon the bed, or in her dressing gown, and therefore
not able to come to them.

"Oh, if that's all," cried Miss Steele, "we can just as well go and
see _her._"

Elinor began to find this impertinence too much for her temper; but
she was saved the trouble of checking it, by Lucy's sharp reprimand,
which now, as on many occasions, though it did not give much sweetness
to the manners of one sister, was of advantage in governing those of
the other.




CHAPTER XXXIII


After some opposition, Marianne yielded to her sister's entreaties,
and consented to go out with her and Mrs. Jennings one morning for
half an hour. She expressly conditioned, however, for paying no
visits, and would do no more than accompany them to Gray's in
Sackville Street, where Elinor was carrying on a negotiation for the
exchange of a few old-fashioned jewels of her mother.

When they stopped at the door, Mrs. Jennings recollected that there
was a lady at the other end of the street on whom she ought to call;
and as she had no business at Gray's, it was resolved, that while her
young friends transacted their's, she should pay her visit and return
for them.

On ascending the stairs, the Miss Dashwoods found so many people
before them in the room, that there was not a person at liberty to
tend to their orders; and they were obliged to wait. All that could be
done was, to sit down at that end of the counter which seemed to
promise the quickest succession; one gentleman only was standing
there, and it is probable that Elinor was not without hope of exciting
his politeness to a quicker despatch. But the correctness of his eye,
and the delicacy of his taste, proved to be beyond his politeness. He
was giving orders for a toothpick-case for himself, and till its size,
shape, and ornaments were determined, all of which, after examining
and debating for a quarter of an hour over every toothpick-case in the
shop, were finally arranged by his own inventive fancy, he had no
leisure to bestow any other attention on the two ladies, than what was
comprised in three or four very broad stares; a kind of notice which
served to imprint on Elinor the remembrance of a person and face, of
strong, natural, sterling insignificance, though adorned in the first
style of fashion.

Marianne was spared from the troublesome feelings of contempt and
resentment, on this impertinent examination of their features, and on
the puppyism of his manner in deciding on all the different horrors of
the different toothpick-cases presented to his inspection, by
remaining unconscious of it all; for she was as well able to collect
her thoughts within herself, and be as ignorant of what was passing
around her, in Mr. Gray's shop, as in her own bedroom.

At last the affair was decided. The ivory, the gold, and the pearls,
all received their appointment, and the gentleman having named the
last day on which his existence could be continued without the
possession of the toothpick-case, drew on his gloves with leisurely
care, and bestowing another glance on the Miss Dashwoods, but such a
one as seemed rather to demand than express admiration, walked off
with a happy air of real conceit and affected indifference.

Elinor lost no time in bringing her business forward, was on the point
of concluding it, when another gentleman presented himself at her
side. She turned her eyes towards his face, and found him with some
surprise to be her brother.

[Illustration: _Introduced to Mrs. Jennings._]

Their affection and pleasure in meeting was just enough to make a very
creditable appearance in Mr. Gray's shop. John Dashwood was really far
from being sorry to see his sisters again; it rather gave them
satisfaction; and his inquiries after their mother were respectful and
attentive.

Elinor found that he and Fanny had been in town two days.

"I wished very much to call upon you yesterday," said he, "but it was
impossible, for we were obliged to take Harry to see the wild beasts
at Exeter Exchange; and we spent the rest of the day with Mrs.
Ferrars. Harry was vastly pleased. _This_ morning I had fully intended
to call on you, if I could possibly find a spare half hour, but one
has always so much to do on first coming to town. I am come here to
bespeak Fanny a seal. But tomorrow I think I shall certainly be able
to call in Berkeley Street, and be introduced to your friend Mrs.
Jennings. I understand she is a woman of very good fortune. And the
Middletons too, you must introduce me to _them_. As my mother-in-law's
relations, I shall be happy to show them every respect. They are
excellent neighbours to you in the country, I understand."

"Excellent indeed. Their attention to our comfort, their friendliness
in every particular, is more than I can express."

"I am extremely glad to hear it, upon my word; extremely glad indeed.
But so it ought to be; they are people of large fortune, they are
related to you, and every civility and accommodation that can serve to
make your situation pleasant might be reasonably expected. And so you
are most comfortably settled in your little cottage and want for
nothing! Edward brought us a most charming account of the place: the
most complete thing of its kind, he said, that ever was, and you all
seemed to enjoy it beyond any thing. It was a great satisfaction to us
to hear it, I assure you."

Elinor did feel a little ashamed of her brother; and was not sorry to
be spared the necessity of answering him, by the arrival of Mrs.
Jennings's servant, who came to tell her that his mistress waited for
them at the door.

Mr. Dashwood attended them down stairs, was introduced to Mrs.
Jennings at the door of her carriage, and repeating his hope of being
able to call on them the next day, took leave.

[Illustration: _Mrs. Jennings assured him directly that she should not
stand upon ceremony._]

His visit was duly paid. He came with a pretence at an apology from
their sister-in-law, for not coming too; "but she was so much engaged
with her mother, that really she had no leisure for going any where."
Mrs. Jennings, however, assured him directly, that she should not
stand upon ceremony, for they were all cousins, or something like
it, and she should certainly wait on Mrs. John Dashwood very soon, and
bring her sisters to see her. His manners to _them_, though calm, were
perfectly kind; to Mrs. Jennings, most attentively civil; and on
Colonel Brandon's coming in soon after himself, he eyed him with a
curiosity which seemed to say, that he only wanted to know him to be
rich, to be equally civil to _him._

After staying with them half an hour, he asked Elinor to walk with him
to Conduit Street, and introduce him to Sir John and Lady Middleton.
The weather was remarkably fine, and she readily consented. As soon as
they were out of the house, his enquiries began.

"Who is Colonel Brandon? Is he a man of fortune?"

"Yes; he has very good property in Dorsetshire."

"I am glad of it. He seems a most gentlemanlike man; and I think,
Elinor, I may congratulate you on the prospect of a very respectable
establishment in life."

"Me, brother! what do you mean?"

"He likes you. I observed him narrowly, and am convinced of it. What
is the amount of his fortune?"

"I believe about two thousand a year."

"Two thousand a-year;" and then working himself up to a pitch of
enthusiastic generosity, he added, "Elinor, I wish with all my heart
it were _twice_ as much, for your sake."

"Indeed I believe you," replied Elinor; "but I am very sure that
Colonel Brandon has not the smallest wish of marrying _me._

"You are mistaken, Elinor; you are very much mistaken. A very little
trouble on your side secures him. Perhaps just at present he may be
undecided; the smallness of your fortune may make him hang back; his
friends may all advise him against it. But some of those little
attentions and encouragements which ladies can so easily give will fix
him, in spite of himself. And there can be no reason why you should
not try for him. It is not to be supposed that any prior attachment on
your side--in short, you know as to an attachment of that kind, it is
quite out of the question, the objections are insurmountable--you have
too much sense not to see all that. Colonel Brandon must be the man;
and no civility shall be wanting on my part to make him pleased with
you and your family. It is a match that must give universal
satisfaction. In short, it is a kind of thing that," lowering his
voice to an important whisper, "will be exceedingly welcome to _all
parties._" Recollecting himself, however, he added, "That is, I mean
to say--your friends are all truly anxious to see you well settled;
Fanny particularly, for she has your interest very much at heart, I
assure you. And her mother too, Mrs. Ferrars, a very good-natured
woman, I am sure it would give her great pleasure; she said as much
the other day."

Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer.

"It would be something remarkable, now," he continued, "something
droll, if Fanny should have a brother and I a sister settling at the
same time. And yet it is not very unlikely."

"Is Mr. Edward Ferrars," said Elinor, with resolution, "going to be
married?"

"It is not actually settled, but there is such a thing in agitation.
He has a most excellent mother. Mrs. Ferrars, with the utmost
liberality, will come forward, and settle on him a thousand a year, if
the match takes place. The lady is the Hon. Miss Morton, only daughter
of the late Lord Morton, with thirty thousand pounds. A very desirable
connection on both sides, and I have not a doubt of its taking place
in time. A thousand a-year is a great deal for a mother to give away,
to make over for ever; but Mrs. Ferrars has a noble spirit. To give
you another instance of her liberality:--The other day, as soon as we
came to town, aware that money could not be very plenty with us just
now, she put bank-notes into Fanny's hands to the amount of two
hundred pounds. And extremely acceptable it is, for we must live at a
great expense while we are here."

He paused for her assent and compassion; and she forced herself to
say--

"Your expenses both in town and country must certainly be
considerable; but your income is a large one."

"Not so large, I dare say, as many people suppose. I do not mean to
complain, however; it is undoubtedly a comfortable one, and I hope
will in time be better. The enclosure of Norland Common, now carrying
on, is a most serious drain. And then I have made a little purchase
within this half year; East Kingham Farm, you must remember the place,
where old Gibson used to live. The land was so very desirable for me
in every respect, so immediately adjoining my own property, that I
felt it my duty to buy it. I could not have answered it to my
conscience to let it fall into any other hands. A man must pay for his
convenience; and it _has_ cost me a vast deal of money."

"More than you think it really and intrinsically worth."

"Why, I hope not that. I might have sold it again, the next day, for
more than I gave: but, with regard to the purchase-money, I might have
been very unfortunate indeed; for the stocks were at that time so low,
that if I had not happened to have the necessary sum in my banker's
hands, I must have sold out to very great loss."

Elinor could only smile.

"Other great and inevitable expenses too we have had on first coming
to Norland. Our respected father, as you well know, bequeathed all the
Stanhill effects that remained at Norland (and very valuable they
were) to your mother. Far be it from me to repine at his doing so; he
had an undoubted right to dispose of his own property as he chose,
but, in consequence of it, we have been obliged to make large
purchases of linen, china, &c. to supply the place of what was taken
away. You may guess, after all these expenses, how very far we must be
from being rich, and how acceptable Mrs. Ferrars's kindness is."

"Certainly," said Elinor; "and assisted by her liberality, I hope you
may yet live to be in easy circumstances."

"Another year or two may do much towards it," he gravely replied; "but
however there is still a great deal to be done. There is not a stone
laid of Fanny's green-house, and nothing but the plan of the
flower-garden marked out."

"Where is the green-house to be?"

"Upon the knoll behind the house. The old walnut trees are all come
down to make room for it. It will be a very fine object from many
parts of the park, and the flower-garden will slope down just before
it, and be exceedingly pretty. We have cleared away all the old thorns
that grew in patches over the brow."

Elinor kept her concern and her censure to herself; and was very
thankful that Marianne was not present, to share the provocation.

Having now said enough to make his poverty clear, and to do away the
necessity of buying a pair of ear-rings for each of his sisters, in
his next visit at Gray's his thoughts took a cheerfuller turn, and he
began to congratulate Elinor on having such a friend as Mrs. Jennings.

"She seems a most valuable woman indeed--Her house, her style of
living, all bespeak an exceeding good income; and it is an
acquaintance that has not only been of great use to you hitherto, but
in the end may prove materially advantageous. Her inviting you to town
is certainly a vast thing in your favour; and indeed, it speaks
altogether so great a regard for you, that in all probability when she
dies you will not be forgotten. She must have a great deal to leave."

"Nothing at all, I should rather suppose; for she has only her
jointure, which will descend to her children."

"But it is not to be imagined that she lives up to her income. Few
people of common prudence will do _that_; and whatever she saves, she
will be able to dispose of."

"And do you not think it more likely that she should leave it to her
daughters, than to us?"

"Her daughters are both exceedingly well married, and therefore I
cannot perceive the necessity of her remembering them farther.
Whereas, in my opinion, by her taking so much notice of you, and
treating you in this kind of way, she has given you a sort of claim on
her future consideration, which a conscientious woman would not
disregard. Nothing can be kinder than her behaviour; and she can
hardly do all this, without being aware of the expectation it raises."

"But she raises none in those most concerned. Indeed, brother, your
anxiety for our welfare and prosperity carries you too far."

"Why, to be sure," said he, seeming to recollect himself, "people have
little, have very little in their power. But, my dear Elinor, what is
the matter with Marianne?--she looks very unwell, has lost her colour,
and is grown quite thin. Is she ill?"

"She is not well, she has had a nervous complaint on her for several
weeks."

"I am sorry for that. At her time of life, any thing of an illness
destroys the bloom for ever! Her's has been a very short one! She was
as handsome a girl last September, as I ever saw; and as likely to
attract the man. There was something in her style of beauty, to
please them particularly. I remember Fanny used to say that she would
marry sooner and better than you did; not but what she is exceedingly
fond of _you_, but so it happened to strike her. She will be mistaken,
however. I question whether Marianne _now_, will marry a man worth
more than five or six hundred a-year, at the utmost, and I am very
much deceived if _you_ do not do better. Dorsetshire! I know very
little of Dorsetshire; but, my dear Elinor, I shall be exceedingly
glad to know more of it; and I think I can answer for your having
Fanny and myself among the earliest and best pleased of your
visitors."

Elinor tried very seriously to convince him that there was no
likelihood of her marrying Colonel Brandon; but it was an expectation
of too much pleasure to himself to be relinquished, and he was really
resolved on seeking an intimacy with that gentleman, and promoting the
marriage by every possible attention. He had just compunction enough
for having done nothing for his sisters himself, to be exceedingly
anxious that everybody else should do a great deal; and an offer from
Colonel Brandon, or a legacy from Mrs. Jennings, was the easiest means
of atoning for his own neglect.

They were lucky enough to find Lady Middleton at home, and Sir John
came in before their visit ended. Abundance of civilities passed on
all sides. Sir John was ready to like anybody, and though Mr. Dashwood
did not seem to know much about horses, he soon set him down as a very
good-natured fellow: while Lady Middleton saw enough of fashion in his
appearance to think his acquaintance worth having; and Mr. Dashwood
went away delighted with both.

"I shall have a charming account to carry to Fanny," said he, as he
walked back with his sister. "Lady Middleton is really a most elegant
woman! Such a woman as I am sure Fanny will be glad to know. And Mrs.
Jennings too, an exceedingly well-behaved woman, though not so elegant
as her daughter. Your sister need not have any scruple even of
visiting _her_, which, to say the truth, has been a little the case,
and very naturally; for we only knew that Mrs. Jennings was the widow
of a man who had got all his money in a low way; and Fanny and Mrs.
Ferrars were both strongly prepossessed, that neither she nor her
daughters were such kind of women as Fanny would like to associate
with. But now I can carry her a most satisfactory account of both."




CHAPTER XXXIV


Mrs. John Dashwood had so much confidence in her husband's judgment,
that she waited the very next day both on Mrs. Jennings and her
daughter; and her confidence was rewarded by finding even the former,
even the woman with whom her sisters were staying, by no means
unworthy her notice; and as for Lady Middleton, she found her one of
the most charming women in the world!

Lady Middleton was equally pleased with Mrs. Dashwood. There was a
kind of cold hearted selfishness on both sides, which mutually
attracted them; and they sympathised with each other in an insipid
propriety of demeanor, and a general want of understanding.

The same manners, however, which recommended Mrs. John Dashwood to the
good opinion of Lady Middleton did not suit the fancy of Mrs.
Jennings, and to _her_ she appeared nothing more than a little
proud-looking woman of uncordial address, who met her husband's
sisters without any affection, and almost without having anything to
say to them; for of the quarter of an hour bestowed on Berkeley
Street, she sat at least seven minutes and a half in silence.

Elinor wanted very much to know, though she did not choose to ask,
whether Edward was then in town; but nothing would have induced Fanny
voluntarily to mention his name before her, till able to tell her that
his marriage with Miss Morton was resolved on, or till her husband's
expectations on Colonel Brandon were answered; because she believed
them still so very much attached to each other, that they could not be
too sedulously divided in word and deed on every occasion. The
intelligence however, which _she_ would not give, soon flowed from
another quarter. Lucy came very shortly to claim Elinor's compassion
on being unable to see Edward, though he had arrived in town with Mr.
and Mrs. Dashwood. He dared not come to Bartlett's Buildings for fear
of detection, and though their mutual impatience to meet, was not to
be told, they could do nothing at present but write.

Edward assured them himself of his being in town, within a very short
time, by twice calling in Berkeley Street. Twice was his card found on
the table, when they returned from their morning's engagements. Elinor
was pleased that he had called; and still more pleased that she had
missed him.

The Dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted with the Middletons,
that, though not much in the habit of giving anything, they determined
to give them--a dinner; and soon after their acquaintance began,
invited them to dine in Harley Street, where they had taken a very
good house for three months. Their sisters and Mrs. Jennings were
invited likewise, and John Dashwood was careful to secure Colonel
Brandon, who, always glad to be where the Miss Dashwoods were,
received his eager civilities with some surprise, but much more
pleasure. They were to meet Mrs. Ferrars; but Elinor could not learn
whether her sons were to be of the party. The expectation of seeing
_her_, however, was enough to make her interested in the engagement;
for though she could now meet Edward's mother without that strong
anxiety which had once promised to attend such an introduction, though
she could now see her with perfect indifference as to her opinion of
herself, her desire of being in company with Mrs. Ferrars, her
curiosity to know what she was like, was as lively as ever.

The interest with which she thus anticipated the party, was soon
afterwards increased, more powerfully than pleasantly, by her hearing
that the Miss Steeles were also to be at it.

So well had they recommended themselves to Lady Middleton, so
agreeable had their assiduities made them to her, that though Lucy was
certainly not so elegant, and her sister not even genteel, she was as
ready as Sir John to ask them to spend a week or two in Conduit
Street; and it happened to be particularly convenient to the Miss
Steeles, as soon as the Dashwoods' invitation was known, that their
visit should begin a few days before the party took place.

Their claims to the notice of Mrs. John Dashwood, as the nieces of
the gentleman who for many years had had the care of her brother,
might not have done much, however, towards procuring them seats at her
table; but as Lady Middleton's guests they must be welcome; and Lucy,
who had long wanted to be personally known to the family, to have a
nearer view of their characters and her own difficulties, and to have
an opportunity of endeavouring to please them, had seldom been happier
in her life, than she was on receiving Mrs. John Dashwood's card.

On Elinor its effect was very different. She began immediately to
determine, that Edward who lived with his mother, must be asked as his
mother was, to a party given by his sister; and to see him for the
first time, after all that passed, in the company of Lucy!--she hardly
knew how she could bear it!

These apprehensions, perhaps, were not founded entirely on reason, and
certainly not at all on truth. They were relieved however, not by her
own recollection, but by the good will of Lucy, who believed herself
to be inflicting a severe disappointment when she told her that Edward
certainly would not be in Harley Street on Tuesday, and even hoped to
be carrying the pain still farther by persuading her that he was kept
away by the extreme affection for herself, which he could not conceal
when they were together.

The important Tuesday came that was to introduce the two young ladies
to this formidable mother-in-law.

"Pity me, dear Miss Dashwood!" said Lucy, as they walked up the stairs
together--for the Middletons arrived so directly after Mrs. Jennings,
that they all followed the servant at the same time--"There is nobody
here but you, that can feel for me. I declare I can hardly stand. Good
gracious!--In a moment I shall see the person that all my happiness
depends on--that is to be my mother!"--

Elinor could have given her immediate relief by suggesting the
possibility of its being Miss Morton's mother, rather than her own,
whom they were about to behold; but instead of doing that, she assured
her, and with great sincerity, that she did pity her--to the utter
amazement of Lucy, who, though really uncomfortable herself, hoped at
least to be an object of irrepressible envy to Elinor.

Mrs. Ferrars was a little, thin woman, upright, even to formality, in
her figure, and serious, even to sourness, in her aspect. Her
complexion was sallow; and her features small, without beauty, and
naturally without expression; but a lucky contraction of the brow had
rescued her countenance from the disgrace of insipidity, by giving it
the strong characters of pride and ill nature. She was not a woman of
many words; for, unlike people in general, she proportioned them to
the number of her ideas; and of the few syllables that did escape her,
not one fell to the share of Miss Dashwood, whom she eyed with the
spirited determination of disliking her at all events.

Elinor could not _now_ be made unhappy by this behaviour. A few months
ago it would have hurt her exceedingly; but it was not in Mrs.
Ferrars' power to distress her by it now; and the difference of her
manners to the Miss Steeles, a difference which seemed purposely made
to humble her more, only amused her. She could not but smile to see
the graciousness of both mother and daughter towards the very
person--for Lucy was particularly distinguished--whom of all others,
had they known as much as she did, they would have been most anxious
to mortify; while she herself, who had comparatively no power to wound
them, sat pointedly slighted by both. But while she smiled at a
graciousness so misapplied, she could not reflect on the mean-spirited
folly from which it sprung, nor observe the studied attentions with
which the Miss Steeles courted its continuance, without thoroughly
despising them all four.

Lucy was all exultation on being so honorably distinguished; and Miss
Steele wanted only to be teased about Dr. Davies to be perfectly
happy.

The dinner was a grand one, the servants were numerous, and every
thing bespoke the Mistress's inclination for show, and the Master's
ability to support it. In spite of the improvements and additions
which were making to the Norland estate, and in spite of its owner
having once been within some thousand pounds of being obliged to sell
out at a loss, nothing gave any symptom of that indigence which he had
tried to infer from it; no poverty of any kind, except of
conversation, appeared; but there, the deficiency was considerable.
John Dashwood had not much to say for himself that was worth hearing,
and his wife had still less. But there was no peculiar disgrace in
this; for it was very much the case with the chief of their visitors,
who almost all laboured under one or other of these disqualifications
for being agreeable--Want of sense, either natural or improved--want
of elegance--want of spirits--or want of temper.

When the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room after dinner, this
poverty was particularly evident, for the gentlemen _had_ supplied the
discourse with some variety--the variety of politics, inclosing land,
and breaking horses--but then it was all over; and one subject only
engaged the ladies till coffee came in, which was the comparative
heights of Harry Dashwood, and Lady Middleton's second son William,
who were nearly of the same age.

Had both the children been there, the affair might have been
determined too easily by measuring them at once; but as Harry only was
present, it was all conjectural assertion on both sides; and every
body had a right to be equally positive in their opinion, and to
repeat it over and over again as often as they liked.

The parties stood thus:--

The two mothers, though each really convinced that her own son was the
tallest, politely decided in favour of the other. The two
grandmothers, with not less partiality, but more sincerity, were
equally earnest in support of their own descendant.

Lucy, who was hardly less anxious to please one parent than the other,
thought the boys were both remarkably tall for their age, and could
not conceive that there could be the smallest difference in the world
between them; and Miss Steele, with yet greater address gave it, as
fast as she could, in favour of each.

Elinor, having once delivered her opinion on William's side, by which
she offended Mrs. Ferrars and Fanny still more, did not see the
necessity of enforcing it by any farther assertion; and Marianne, when
called on for her's, offended them all, by declaring that she had no
opinion to give, as she had never thought about it.

Before her removing from Norland, Elinor had painted a very pretty
pair of screens for her sister-in-law, which being now just mounted
and brought home, ornamented her present drawing room; and these
screens, catching the eye of John Dashwood on his following the other
gentlemen into the room, were officiously handed by him to Colonel
Brandon for his admiration.

"These are done by my eldest sister," said he; "and you, as a man of
taste, will, I dare say, be pleased with them. I do not know whether
you have ever happened to see any of her performances before, but she
is in general reckoned to draw extremely well."

The Colonel, though disclaiming all pretensions to connoisseurship,
warmly admired the screens, as he would have done any thing painted by
Miss Dashwood; and on the curiosity of the others being of course
excited, they were handed round for general inspection. Mrs. Ferrars,
not aware of their being Elinor's work, particularly requested to look
at them; and after they had received gratifying testimony of Lady
Middleton's approbation, Fanny presented them to her mother,
considerately informing her, at the same time, that they were done by
Miss Dashwood.

"Hum"--said Mrs. Ferrars--"very pretty,"--and without regarding them
at all, returned them to her daughter.

Perhaps Fanny thought for a moment that her mother had been quite rude
enough,--for, colouring a little, she immediately said--

"They are very pretty, ma'am--an't they?" But then again, the dread of
having been too civil, too encouraging herself, probably came over
her, for she presently added, "Do you not think they are something in
Miss Morton's style of painting, Ma'am?--She _does_ paint most
delightfully!--How beautifully her last landscape is done!"

"Beautifully indeed! But _she_ does every thing well."

Marianne could not bear this. She was already greatly displeased with
Mrs. Ferrars; and such ill-timed praise of another, at Elinor's
expense, though she had not any notion of what was principally meant
by it, provoked her immediately to say with warmth--

"This is admiration of a very particular kind! what is Miss Morton to
us? who knows, or who cares, for her?--it is Elinor of whom _we_ think
and speak."

And so saying, she took the screens out of her sister-in-law's hands,
to admire them herself as they ought to be admired.

[Illustration: _Mrs. Ferrars._]

Mrs. Ferrars looked exceedingly angry, and drawing herself up more
stiffly than ever, pronounced in retort this bitter philippic, "Miss
Morton is Lord Morton's daughter."

Fanny looked very angry too, and her husband was all in a fright at
his sister's audacity. Elinor was much more hurt by Marianne's warmth
than she had been by what produced it; but Colonel Brandon's eyes, as
they were fixed on Marianne, declared that he noticed only what was
amiable in it, the affectionate heart which could not bear to see a
sister slighted in the smallest point.

Marianne's feelings did not stop here. The cold insolence of Mrs.
Ferrars's general behaviour to her sister, seemed, to her, to foretell
such difficulties and distresses to Elinor, as her own wounded heart
taught her to think of with horror; and urged by a strong impulse of
affectionate sensibility, she moved after a moment, to her sister's
chair, and putting one arm round her neck, and one cheek close to
hers, said in a low, but eager, voice--

"Dear, dear Elinor, don't mind them. Don't let them make _you_
unhappy."

She could say no more; her spirits were quite overcome, and hiding her
face on Elinor's shoulder, she burst into tears. Every body's
attention was called, and almost every body was concerned. Colonel
Brandon rose up and went to them without knowing what he did. Mrs.
Jennings, with a very intelligent "Ah! poor dear," immediately gave
her her salts; and Sir John felt so desperately enraged against the
author of this nervous distress, that he instantly changed his seat to
one close by Lucy Steele, and gave her, in a whisper, a brief account
of the whole shocking affair.

In a few minutes, however, Marianne was recovered enough to put an end
to the bustle, and sit down among the rest; though her spirits
retained the impression of what had passed, the whole evening.

"Poor Marianne!" said her brother to Colonel Brandon, in a low voice,
as soon as he could secure his attention: "She has not such good
health as her sister,--she is very nervous,--she has not Elinor's
constitution;--and one must allow that there is something very trying
to a young woman who _has been_ a beauty in the loss of her personal
attractions. You would not think it perhaps, but Marianne _was_
remarkably handsome a few months ago; quite as handsome as Elinor. Now
you see it is all gone."




CHAPTER XXXV


Elinor's curiosity to see Mrs. Ferrars was satisfied. She had found in
her every thing that could tend to make a farther connection between
the families undesirable. She had seen enough of her pride, her
meanness, and her determined prejudice against herself, to comprehend
all the difficulties that must have perplexed the engagement, and
retarded the marriage, of Edward and herself, had he been otherwise
free;--and she had seen almost enough to be thankful for her _own_
sake, that one greater obstacle preserved her from suffering under any
other of Mrs. Ferrars's creation, preserved her from all dependence
upon her caprice, or any solicitude for her good opinion. Or at least,
if she did not bring herself quite to rejoice in Edward's being
fettered to Lucy, she determined, that had Lucy been more amiable, she
_ought_ to have rejoiced.

She wondered that Lucy's spirits could be so very much elevated by the
civility of Mrs. Ferrars;--that her interest and her vanity should so
very much blind her as to make the attention which seemed only paid
her because she was _not Elinor_ appear a compliment to herself--or to
allow her to derive encouragement from a preference only given her,
because her real situation was unknown. But that it was so, had not
only been declared by Lucy's eyes at the time, but was declared over
again the next morning more openly, for at her particular desire, Lady
Middleton set her down in Berkeley Street on the chance of seeing
Elinor alone, to tell her how happy she was.

The chance proved a lucky one, for a message from Mrs. Palmer soon
after she arrived, carried Mrs. Jennings away.

"My dear friend," cried Lucy, as soon as they were by themselves, "I
come to talk to you of my happiness. Could anything be so flattering
as Mrs. Ferrars's way of treating me yesterday? So exceeding affable
as she was! You know how I dreaded the thoughts of seeing her; but the
very moment I was introduced, there was such an affability in her
behaviour as really should seem to say, she had quite took a fancy to
me. Now was not it so? You saw it all; and was not you quite struck
with it?"

"She was certainly very civil to you."

"Civil!--Did you see nothing but only civility?--I saw a vast deal
more. Such kindness as fell to the share of nobody but me!--No pride,
no hauteur, and your sister just the same--all sweetness and
affability!"

Elinor wished to talk of something else, but Lucy still pressed her to
own that she had reason for her happiness; and Elinor was obliged to
go on.

"Undoubtedly, if they had known your engagement," said she, "nothing
could be more flattering than their treatment of you;--but as that was
not the case--"

"I guessed you would say so," replied Lucy quickly--"but there was no
reason in the world why Mrs. Ferrars should seem to like me, if she
did not, and her liking me is every thing. You shan't talk me out of
my satisfaction. I am sure it will all end well, and there will be no
difficulties at all, to what I used to think. Mrs. Ferrars is a
charming woman, and so is your sister. They are both delightful women,
indeed!--I wonder I should never hear you say how agreeable Mrs.
Dashwood was!"

To this Elinor had no answer to make, and did not attempt any.

"Are you ill, Miss Dashwood?--you seem low--you don't speak;--sure you
an't well."

"I never was in better health."

"I am glad of it with all my heart; but really you did not look it. I
should be sorry to have _you_ ill; you, that have been the greatest
comfort to me in the world!--Heaven knows what I should have done
without your friendship."--

Elinor tried to make a civil answer, though doubting her own success.
But it seemed to satisfy Lucy, for she directly replied--

"Indeed I am perfectly convinced of your regard for me, and next to
Edward's love, it is the greatest comfort I have. Poor Edward!--But
now there is one good thing, we shall be able to meet, and meet pretty
often, for Lady Middleton's delighted with Mrs. Dashwood, so we shall
be a good deal in Harley Street, I dare say, and Edward spends half
his time with his sister--besides, Lady Middleton and Mrs. Ferrars
will visit now;--and Mrs. Ferrars and your sister were both so good
to say more than once, they should always be glad to see me. They are
such charming women!--I am sure if ever you tell your sister what I
think of her, you cannot speak too high."

But Elinor would not give her any encouragement to hope that she
_should_ tell her sister. Lucy continued.

"I am sure I should have seen it in a moment, if Mrs. Ferrars had took
a dislike to me. If she had only made me a formal courtesy, for
instance, without saying a word, and never after had took any notice
of me, and never looked at me in a pleasant way--you know what I
mean--if I had been treated in that forbidding sort of way, I should
have gave it all up in despair. I could not have stood it. For where
she _does_ dislike, I know it is most violent."

Elinor was prevented from making any reply to this civil triumph, by
the door's being thrown open, the servant's announcing Mr. Ferrars,
and Edward's immediately walking in.

It was a very awkward moment; and the countenance of each showed that
it was so. They all looked exceedingly foolish; and Edward seemed to
have as great an inclination to walk out of the room again, as to
advance farther into it. The very circumstance, in its unpleasantest
form, which they would each have been most anxious to avoid, had
fallen on them. They were not only all three together, but were
together without the relief of any other person. The ladies recovered
themselves first. It was not Lucy's business to put herself forward,
and the appearance of secrecy must still be kept up. She could
therefore only _look_ her tenderness, and after slightly addressing
him, said no more.

But Elinor had more to do; and so anxious was she, for his sake and
her own, to do it well, that she forced herself, after a moment's
recollection, to welcome him, with a look and manner that were almost
easy, and almost open; and another struggle, another effort still
improved them. She would not allow the presence of Lucy, nor the
consciousness of some injustice towards herself, to deter her from
saying that she was happy to see him, and that she had very much
regretted being from home, when he called before in Berkeley Street.
She would not be frightened from paying him those attentions which, as
a friend and almost a relation, were his due, by the observant eyes
of Lucy, though she soon perceived them to be narrowly watching her.

Her manners gave some re-assurance to Edward, and he had courage
enough to sit down; but his embarrassment still exceeded that of the
ladies in a proportion, which the case rendered reasonable, though his
sex might make it rare; for his heart had not the indifference of
Lucy's, nor could his conscience have quite the ease of Elinor's.

Lucy, with a demure and settled air, seemed determined to make no
contribution to the comfort of the others, and would not say a word;
and almost every thing that _was_ said, proceeded from Elinor, who was
obliged to volunteer all the information about her mother's health,
their coming to town, &c. which Edward ought to have inquired about,
but never did.

Her exertions did not stop here; for she soon afterwards felt herself
so heroically disposed as to determine, under pretence of fetching
Marianne, to leave the others by themselves; and she really did it,
and _that_ in the handsomest manner, for she loitered away several
minutes on the landing-place, with the most high-minded fortitude,
before she went to her sister. When that was once done, however, it
was time for the raptures of Edward to cease; for Marianne's joy
hurried her into the drawing-room immediately. Her pleasure in seeing
him was like every other of her feelings, strong in itself, and
strongly spoken. She met him with a hand that would be taken, and a
voice that expressed the affection of a sister.

"Dear Edward!" she cried, "this is a moment of great happiness!--This
would almost make amends for every thing?"

Edward tried to return her kindness as it deserved, but before such
witnesses he dared not say half what he really felt. Again they all
sat down, and for a moment or two all were silent; while Marianne was
looking with the most speaking tenderness, sometimes at Edward and
sometimes at Elinor, regretting only that their delight in each other
should be checked by Lucy's unwelcome presence. Edward was the first
to speak, and it was to notice Marianne's altered looks, and express
his fear of her not finding London agree with her.

"Oh, don't think of me!" she replied with spirited earnestness, though
her eyes were filled with tears as she spoke, "don't think of _my_
health. Elinor is well, you see. That must be enough for us both."

This remark was not calculated to make Edward or Elinor more easy, nor
to conciliate the good will of Lucy, who looked up at Marianne with no
very benignant expression.

"Do you like London?" said Edward, willing to say any thing that might
introduce another subject.

"Not at all. I expected much pleasure in it, but I have found none.
The sight of you, Edward, is the only comfort it has afforded; and
thank Heaven! you are what you always were!"

She paused--no one spoke.

"I think, Elinor," she presently added, "we must employ Edward to take
care of us in our return to Barton. In a week or two, I suppose, we
shall be going; and, I trust, Edward will not be very unwilling to
accept the charge."

Poor Edward muttered something, but what it was, nobody knew, not even
himself. But Marianne, who saw his agitation, and could easily trace
it to whatever cause best pleased herself, was perfectly satisfied,
and soon talked of something else.

"We spent such a day, Edward, in Harley Street yesterday! So dull, so
wretchedly dull!--But I have much to say to you on that head, which
cannot be said now."

And with this admirable discretion did she defer the assurance of her
finding their mutual relatives more disagreeable than ever, and of her
being particularly disgusted with his mother, till they were more in
private.

"But why were you not there, Edward?--Why did you not come?"

"I was engaged elsewhere."

"Engaged! But what was that, when such friends were to be met?"

"Perhaps, Miss Marianne," cried Lucy, eager to take some revenge on
her, "you think young men never stand upon engagements, if they have
no mind to keep them, little as well as great."

Elinor was very angry, but Marianne seemed entirely insensible of the
sting; for she calmly replied--

"Not so, indeed; for, seriously speaking, I am very sure that
conscience only kept Edward from Harley Street. And I really believe
he _has_ the most delicate conscience in the world; the most
scrupulous in performing every engagement, however minute, and however
it may make against his interest or pleasure. He is the most fearful
of giving pain, of wounding expectation, and the most incapable of
being selfish, of any body I ever saw. Edward, it is so, and I will
say it. What! are you never to hear yourself praised!--Then you must
be no friend of mine; for those who will accept of my love and esteem,
must submit to my open commendation."

The nature of her commendation, in the present case, however, happened
to be particularly ill-suited to the feelings of two thirds of her
auditors, and was so very unexhilarating to Edward, that he very soon
got up to go away.

"Going so soon!" said Marianne; "my dear Edward, this must not be."

And drawing him a little aside, she whispered her persuasion that Lucy
could not stay much longer. But even this encouragement failed, for he
would go; and Lucy, who would have outstayed him, had his visit lasted
two hours, soon afterwards went away.

"What can bring her here so often?" said Marianne, on her leaving
them. "Could not she see that we wanted her gone!--how teasing to
Edward!"

"Why so?--we were all his friends, and Lucy has been the longest known
to him of any. It is but natural that he should like to see her as
well as ourselves."

Marianne looked at her steadily, and said, "You know, Elinor, that
this is a kind of talking which I cannot bear. If you only hope to
have your assertion contradicted, as I must suppose to be the case,
you ought to recollect that I am the last person in the world to do
it. I cannot descend to be tricked out of assurances, that are not
really wanted."

She then left the room; and Elinor dared not follow her to say more,
for bound as she was by her promise of secrecy to Lucy, she could give
no information that would convince Marianne; and painful as the
consequences of her still continuing in an error might be, she was
obliged to submit to it. All that she could hope, was that Edward
would not often expose her or himself to the distress of hearing
Marianne's mistaken warmth, nor to the repetition of any other part of
the pain that had attended their recent meeting--and this she had
every reason to expect.

[Illustration: _Drawing him a little aside._]




CHAPTER XXXVI


Within a few days after this meeting, the newspapers announced to the
world, that the lady of Thomas Palmer, Esq. was safely delivered of a
son and heir; a very interesting and satisfactory paragraph, at least
to all those intimate connections who knew it before.

This event, highly important to Mrs. Jennings's happiness, produced a
temporary alteration in the disposal of her time, and influenced, in a
like degree, the engagements of her young friends; for as she wished
to be as much as possible with Charlotte, she went thither every
morning as soon as she was dressed, and did not return till late in
the evening; and the Miss Dashwoods, at the particular request of the
Middletons, spent the whole of every day, in Conduit Street. For their
own comfort they would much rather have remained, at least all the
morning, in Mrs. Jennings's house; but it was not a thing to be urged
against the wishes of everybody. Their hours were therefore made over
to Lady Middleton and the two Miss Steeles, by whom their company, in
fact was as little valued, as it was professedly sought.

They had too much sense to be desirable companions to the former; and
by the latter they were considered with a jealous eye, as intruding on
_their_ ground, and sharing the kindness which they wanted to
monopolize. Though nothing could be more polite than Lady Middleton's
behaviour to Elinor and Marianne, she did not really like them at all.
Because they neither flattered herself nor her children, she could not
believe them good-natured; and because they were fond of reading, she
fancied them satirical: perhaps without exactly knowing what it was to
be satirical; but _that_ did not signify. It was censure in common
use, and easily given.

Their presence was a restraint both on her and on Lucy. It checked the
idleness of one, and the business of the other. Lady Middleton was
ashamed of doing nothing before them, and the flattery which Lucy was
proud to think of and administer at other times, she feared they would
despise her for offering. Miss Steele was the least discomposed of the
three, by their presence; and it was in their power to reconcile her
to it entirely. Would either of them only have given her a full and
minute account of the whole affair between Marianne and Mr.
Willoughby, she would have thought herself amply rewarded for the
sacrifice of the best place by the fire after dinner, which their
arrival occasioned. But this conciliation was not granted; for though
she often threw out expressions of pity for her sister to Elinor, and
more than once dropt a reflection on the inconstancy of beaux before
Marianne, no effect was produced, but a look of indifference from the
former, or of disgust in the latter. An effort even yet lighter might
have made her their friend. Would they only have laughed at her about
the Doctor! But so little were they, anymore than the others, inclined
to oblige her, that if Sir John dined from home, she might spend a
whole day without hearing any other raillery on the subject, than what
she was kind enough to bestow on herself.

All these jealousies and discontents, however, were so totally
unsuspected by Mrs. Jennings, that she thought it a delightful thing
for the girls to be together; and generally congratulated her young
friends every night, on having escaped the company of a stupid old
woman so long. She joined them sometimes at Sir John's, sometimes at
her own house; but wherever it was, she always came in excellent
spirits, full of delight and importance, attributing Charlotte's well
doing to her own care, and ready to give so exact, so minute a detail
of her situation, as only Miss Steele had curiosity enough to desire.
One thing _did_ disturb her; and of that she made her daily complaint.
Mr. Palmer maintained the common, but unfatherly opinion among his
sex, of all infants being alike; and though she could plainly
perceive, at different times, the most striking resemblance between
this baby and every one of his relations on both sides, there was no
convincing his father of it; no persuading him to believe that it was
not exactly like every other baby of the same age; nor could he even
be brought to acknowledge the simple proposition of its being the
finest child in the world.

I come now to the relation of a misfortune, which about this time
befell Mrs. John Dashwood. It so happened that while her two sisters
with Mrs. Jennings were first calling on her in Harley Street, another
of her acquaintance had dropt in--a circumstance in itself not
apparently likely to produce evil to her. But while the imaginations
of other people will carry them away to form wrong judgments of our
conduct, and to decide on it by slight appearances, one's happiness
must in some measure be always at the mercy of chance. In the present
instance, this last-arrived lady allowed her fancy to so far outrun
truth and probability, that on merely hearing the name of the Miss
Dashwoods, and understanding them to be Mr. Dashwood's sisters, she
immediately concluded them to be staying in Harley Street; and this
misconstruction produced within a day or two afterwards, cards of
invitation for them as well as for their brother and sister, to a
small musical party at her house. The consequence of which was, that
Mrs. John Dashwood was obliged to submit not only to the exceedingly
great inconvenience of sending her carriage for the Miss Dashwoods,
but, what was still worse, must be subject to all the unpleasantness
of appearing to treat them with attention: and who could tell that
they might not expect to go out with her a second time? The power of
disappointing them, it was true, must always be her's. But that was
not enough; for when people are determined on a mode of conduct which
they know to be wrong, they feel injured by the expectation of any
thing better from them.

Marianne had now been brought by degrees, so much into the habit of
going out every day, that it was become a matter of indifference to
her, whether she went or not: and she prepared quietly and
mechanically for every evening's engagement, though without expecting
the smallest amusement from any, and very often without knowing, till
the last moment, where it was to take her.

To her dress and appearance she was grown so perfectly indifferent, as
not to bestow half the consideration on it, during the whole of her
toilet, which it received from Miss Steele in the first five minutes
of their being together, when it was finished. Nothing escaped _her_
minute observation and general curiosity; she saw every thing, and
asked every thing; was never easy till she knew the price of every
part of Marianne's dress; could have guessed the number of her gowns
altogether with better judgment than Marianne herself, and was not
without hopes of finding out before they parted, how much her washing
cost per week, and how much she had every year to spend upon herself.
The impertinence of these kind of scrutinies, moreover, was generally
concluded with a compliment, which though meant as its douceur, was
considered by Marianne as the greatest impertinence of all; for after
undergoing an examination into the value and make of her gown, the
colour of her shoes, and the arrangement of her hair, she was almost
sure of being told that upon "her word she looked vastly smart, and
she dared to say she would make a great many conquests."

With such encouragement as this, was she dismissed on the present
occasion, to her brother's carriage; which they were ready to enter
five minutes after it stopped at the door, a punctuality not very
agreeable to their sister-in-law, who had preceded them to the house
of her acquaintance, and was there hoping for some delay on their part
that might inconvenience either herself or her coachman.

The events of this evening were not very remarkable. The party, like
other musical parties, comprehended a great many people who had real
taste for the performance, and a great many more who had none at all;
and the performers themselves were, as usual, in their own estimation,
and that of their immediate friends, the first private performers in
England.

As Elinor was neither musical, nor affecting to be so, she made no
scruple of turning her eyes from the grand pianoforte, whenever it
suited her, and unrestrained even by the presence of a harp, and
violoncello, would fix them at pleasure on any other object in the
room. In one of these excursive glances she perceived among a group of
young men, the very he, who had given them a lecture on
toothpick-cases at Gray's. She perceived him soon afterwards looking
at herself, and speaking familiarly to her brother; and had just
determined to find out his name from the latter, when they both came
towards her, and Mr. Dashwood introduced him to her as Mr. Robert
Ferrars.

He addressed her with easy civility, and twisted his head into a bow
which assured her as plainly as words could have done, that he was
exactly the coxcomb she had heard him described to be by Lucy. Happy
had it been for her, if her regard for Edward had depended less on his
own merit, than on the merit of his nearest relations! For then his
brother's bow must have given the finishing stroke to what the
ill-humour of his mother and sister would have begun. But while she
wondered at the difference of the two young men, she did not find that
the emptiness of conceit of the one, put her out of all charity with
the modesty and worth of the other. Why they _were_ different, Robert
exclaimed to her himself in the course of a quarter of an hour's
conversation; for, talking of his brother, and lamenting the extreme
_gaucherie_ which he really believed kept him from mixing in proper
society, he candidly and generously attributed it much less to any
natural deficiency, than to the misfortune of a private education;
while he himself, though probably without any particular, any material
superiority by nature, merely from the advantage of a public school,
was as well fitted to mix in the world as any other man.

"Upon my soul," he added, "I believe it is nothing more; and so I
often tell my mother, when she is grieving about it. 'My dear Madam,'
I always say to her, 'you must make yourself easy. The evil is now
irremediable, and it has been entirely your own doing. Why would you
be persuaded by my uncle, Sir Robert, against your own judgment, to
place Edward under private tuition, at the most critical time of his
life? If you had only sent him to Westminster as well as myself,
instead of sending him to Mr. Pratt's, all this would have been
prevented.' This is the way in which I always consider the matter, and
my mother is perfectly convinced of her error."

Elinor would not oppose his opinion, because, whatever might be her
general estimation of the advantage of a public school, she could not
think of Edward's abode in Mr. Pratt's family, with any satisfaction.

"You reside in Devonshire, I think,"--was his next observation, "in a
cottage near Dawlish."

Elinor set him right as to its situation; and it seemed rather
surprising to him that anybody could live in Devonshire, without
living near Dawlish. He bestowed his hearty approbation however on
their species of house.

"For my own part," said he, "I am excessively fond of a cottage; there
is always so much comfort, so much elegance about them. And I protest,
if I had any money to spare, I should buy a little land and build one
myself, within a short distance of London, where I might drive myself
down at any time, and collect a few friends about me, and be happy. I
advise every body who is going to build, to build a cottage. My friend
Lord Courtland came to me the other day on purpose to ask my advice,
and laid before me three different plans of Bonomi's. I was to decide
on the best of them. 'My dear Courtland,' said I, immediately throwing
them all into the fire, 'do not adopt either of them, but by all means
build a cottage.' And that I fancy, will be the end of it.

"Some people imagine that there can be no accommodations, no space in
a cottage; but this is all a mistake. I was last month at my friend
Elliott's, near Dartford. Lady Elliott wished to give a dance. 'But
how can it be done?' said she; 'my dear Ferrars, do tell me how it is
to be managed. There is not a room in this cottage that will hold ten
couple, and where can the supper be?' I immediately saw that there
could be no difficulty in it, so I said, 'My dear Lady Elliott, do not
be uneasy. The dining parlour will admit eighteen couple with ease;
card-tables may be placed in the drawing-room; the library may be open
for tea and other refreshments; and let the supper be set out in the
saloon.' Lady Elliott was delighted with the thought. We measured the
dining-room, and found it would hold exactly eighteen couple, and the
affair was arranged precisely after my plan. So that, in fact, you
see, if people do but know how to set about it, every comfort may be
as well enjoyed in a cottage as in the most spacious dwelling."

Elinor agreed to it all, for she did not think he deserved the
compliment of rational opposition.

As John Dashwood had no more pleasure in music than his eldest sister,
his mind was equally at liberty to fix on any thing else; and a
thought struck him during the evening, which he communicated to his
wife, for her approbation, when they got home. The consideration of
Mrs. Dennison's mistake, in supposing his sisters their guests, had
suggested the propriety of their being really invited to become such,
while Mrs. Jennings's engagements kept her from home. The expense
would be nothing, the inconvenience not more; and it was altogether an
attention which the delicacy of his conscience pointed out to be
requisite to its complete enfranchisement from his promise to his
father. Fanny was startled at the proposal.

"I do not see how it can be done," said she, "without affronting Lady
Middleton, for they spend every day with her; otherwise I should be
exceedingly glad to do it. You know I am always ready to pay them any
attention in my power, as my taking them out this evening shows. But
they are Lady Middleton's visitors. How can I ask them away from her?"

Her husband, but with great humility, did not see the force of her
objection. "They had already spent a week in this manner in Conduit
Street, and Lady Middleton could not be displeased at their giving the
same number of days to such near relations."

Fanny paused a moment, and then, with fresh vigor, said--

"My love I would ask them with all my heart, if it was in my power.
But I had just settled within myself to ask the Miss Steeles to spend
a few days with us. They are very well behaved, good kind of girls;
and I think the attention is due to them, as their uncle did so very
well by Edward. We can ask your sisters some other year, you know; but
the Miss Steeles may not be in town any more. I am sure you will like
them; indeed, you _do_ like them, you know, very much already, and so
does my mother; and they are such favourites with Harry!"

Mr. Dashwood was convinced. He saw the necessity of inviting the Miss
Steeles immediately, and his conscience was pacified by the resolution
of inviting his sisters another year; at the same time, however, slyly
suspecting that another year would make the invitation needless, by
bringing Elinor to town as Colonel Brandon's wife, and Marianne as
_their_ visitor.

Fanny, rejoicing in her escape, and proud of the ready wit that had
procured it, wrote the next morning to Lucy, to request her company
and her sister's, for some days, in Harley Street, as soon as Lady
Middleton could spare them. This was enough to make Lucy really and
reasonably happy. Mrs. Dashwood seemed actually working for her,
herself; cherishing all her hopes, and promoting all her views! Such
an opportunity of being with Edward and his family was, above all
things, the most material to her interest, and such an invitation the
most gratifying to her feelings! It was an advantage that could not
be too gratefully acknowledged, nor too speedily made use of; and the
visit to Lady Middleton, which had not before had any precise limits,
was instantly discovered to have been always meant to end in two days'
time.

When the note was shown to Elinor, as it was within ten minutes after
its arrival, it gave her, for the first time, some share in the
expectations of Lucy; for such a mark of uncommon kindness, vouchsafed
on so short an acquaintance, seemed to declare that the good-will
towards her arose from something more than merely malice against
herself; and might be brought, by time and address, to do every thing
that Lucy wished. Her flattery had already subdued the pride of Lady
Middleton, and made an entry into the close heart of Mrs. John
Dashwood; and these were effects that laid open the probability of
greater.

The Miss Steeles removed to Harley Street, and all that reached Elinor
of their influence there, strengthened her expectation of the event.
Sir John, who called on them more than once, brought home such
accounts of the favour they were in, as must be universally striking.
Mrs. Dashwood had never been so much pleased with any young women in
her life, as she was with them; had given each of them a needle book
made by some emigrant; called Lucy by her Christian name; and did not
know whether she should ever be able to part with them.




CHAPTER XXXVII


Mrs. Palmer was so well at the end of a fortnight, that her mother
felt it no longer necessary to give up the whole of her time to her;
and, contenting herself with visiting her once or twice a day,
returned from that period to her own home, and her own habits, in
which she found the Miss Dashwoods very ready to resume their former
share.

About the third or fourth morning after their being thus resettled in
Berkeley Street, Mrs. Jennings, on returning from her ordinary visit
to Mrs. Palmer, entered the drawing-room, where Elinor was sitting by
herself, with an air of such hurrying importance as prepared her to
hear something wonderful; and giving her time only to form that idea,
began directly to justify it, by saying--

"Lord! my dear Miss Dashwood! have you heard the news?"

"No, ma'am. What is it?"

"Something so strange! But you shall hear it all. When I got to Mr.
Palmer's, I found Charlotte quite in a fuss about the child. She was
sure it was very ill--it cried, and fretted, and was all over pimples.
So I looked at it directly, and, 'Lord! my dear,' says I, 'it is
nothing in the world, but the red gum--' and nurse said just the same.
But Charlotte, she would not be satisfied, so Mr. Donavan was sent
for; and luckily he happened to just come in from Harley Street, so he
stepped over directly, and as soon as ever he saw the child, he said
just as we did, that it was nothing in the world but the red gum, and
then Charlotte was easy. And so, just as he was going away again, it
came into my head, I am sure I do not know how I happened to think of
it, but it came into my head to ask him if there was any news. So upon
that, he smirked, and simpered, and looked grave, and seemed to know
something or other, and at last he said in a whisper, 'For fear any
unpleasant report should reach the young ladies under your care as to
their sister's indisposition, I think it advisable to say, that I
believe there is no great reason for alarm; I hope Mrs. Dashwood will
do very well.'"

"What! is Fanny ill?"

[Illustration: _In a whisper._]

"That is exactly what I said, my dear. 'Lord!' says I, 'is Mrs.
Dashwood ill?' So then it all came out; and the long and the short of
the matter, by all I can learn, seems to be this. Mr. Edward Ferrars,
the very young man I used to joke with you about (but however, as it
turns out, I am monstrous glad there was never any thing in it), Mr.
Edward Ferrars, it seems, has been engaged above this twelvemonth to
my cousin Lucy! There's for you, my dear! And not a creature knowing a
syllable of the matter, except Nancy! Could you have believed such a
thing possible? There is no great wonder in their liking one another;
but that matters should be brought so forward between them, and nobody
suspect it! _That_ is strange! I never happened to see them together,
or I am sure I should have found it out directly. Well, and so this
was kept a great secret, for fear of Mrs. Ferrars, and neither she nor
your brother or sister suspected a word of the matter: till this very
morning, poor Nancy, who, you know, is a well-meaning creature, but no
conjurer, popt it all out. 'Lord!' thinks she to herself, 'they are
all so fond of Lucy, to be sure they will make no difficulty about
it;' and so, away she went to your sister, who was sitting all alone
at her carpet-work, little suspecting what was to come--for she had
just been saying to your brother, only five minutes before, that she
thought to make a match between Edward and some Lord's daughter or
other, I forget who. So you may think what a blow it was to all her
vanity and pride. She fell into violent hysterics immediately, with
such screams as reached your brother's ears, as he was sitting in his
own dressing-room down stairs, thinking about writing a letter to his
steward in the country. So up he flew directly, and a terrible scene
took place, for Lucy was come to them by that time, little dreaming
what was going on. Poor soul! I pity _her._ And I must say, I think
she was used very hardly; for your sister scolded like any fury, and
soon drove her into a fainting fit. Nancy, she fell upon her knees,
and cried bitterly; and your brother, he walked about the room, and
said he did not know what to do. Mrs. Dashwood declared they should
not stay a minute longer in the house, and your brother was forced to
go down upon _his_ knees too, to persuade her to let them stay till
they had packed up their clothes. _Then_ she fell into hysterics
again, and he was so frightened that he would send for Mr. Donavan,
and Mr. Donavan found the house in all this uproar. The carriage was
at the door ready to take my poor cousins away, and they were just
stepping in as he came off; poor Lucy in such a condition, he says,
she could hardly walk; and Nancy, she was almost as bad. I declare, I
have no patience with your sister; and I hope, with all my heart, it
will be a match in spite of her. Lord! what a taking poor Mr. Edward
will be in when he hears of it! To have his love used so scornfully!
for they say he is monstrous fond of her, as well he may. I should not
wonder, if he was to be in the greatest passion!--and Mr. Donavan
thinks just the same. He and I had a great deal of talk about it; and
the best of all is, that he is gone back again to Harley Street, that
he may be within call when Mrs. Ferrars is told of it, for she was
sent for as soon as ever my cousins left the house, for your sister
was sure _she_ would be in hysterics too; and so she may, for what I
care. I have no pity for either of them. I have no notion of people's
