round and round, which was very amusing. According to the statement of
Porcupine himself, this muscle, if he bends the arm back with force,
would snap a paper-string wound around it twice. I said I might do the
same thing if it were a paper-string, and he challenged me. "No, you
can't," he said. "See if you can." As it would not look well if I
failed, I did not try.

"Say, after you have drunk all you want to-night at the dinner, take a
fall out of Red Shirt and Clown, eh?" I suggested to him for fun.
Porcupine thought for a moment and said, "Not to-night, I guess." I
wanted to know why, and he pointed out that it would be bad for Koga.

"Besides, if I'm going to give it to them at all, I've to get them red
handed in their dirty scheme, or all the blame will be on me," he added
discretely. Even Porcupine seems to have wiser judgment than I.

"Then make a speech and praise Mr. Koga sky-high. My speech becomes sort
of jumpy, wanting dignity. And at any formal gathering, I get lumpy in
my throat, and can't speak. So I leave it to you," I said.

"That's a strange disease. Then you can't speak in the presence of other
people? It would be awkward, I suppose," he said, and I told him not
quite as much awkward as he might think.

About then, the time for the farewell dinner party arrived, and I went
to the hall with Porcupine. The dinner party was to be held at
Kashin-tei which is said to be the leading restaurant in the town, but I
had never been in the house before. This restaurant, I understood, was
formerly the private residence of the chief retainer of the daimyo of
the province, and its condition seemed to confirm the story. The
residence of a chief retainer transformed into a restaurant was like
making a saucepan out of warrior's armor.

When we two came there, about all of the guests were present. They
formed two or three groups in the spacious room of fifty mats. The
alcove in this room, in harmony with its magnificence, was very large.
The alcove in the fifteen-mat room which I occupied at Yamashiro-ya made
a small showing beside it. I measured it and found it was twelve feet
wide. On the right, in the alcove, there was a seto-ware flower vase,
painted with red designs, in which was a large branch of pine tree. Why
the pine twigs, I did not know, except that they are in no danger of
withering for many a month to come, and are economical. I asked the
teacher of natural history where that seto-ware flower vase is made. He
told me it was not a seto-ware but an imari. Isn't imari seto-ware? I
wondered audibly, and the natural history man laughed. I heard afterward
that we call it a seto-ware because it is made in Seto. I'm a Yedo kid,
and thought all china was seto-wares. In the center of the alcove was
hung a panel on which were written twenty eight letters, each letter as
large as my face. It was poorly written; so poorly indeed that I
enquired of the teacher of Confucius why such a poor work be hung in
apparent show of pride. He explained that it was written by Kaioku a
famous artist in the writing, but Kaioku or anyone else, I still declare
the work poorly done.

By and by, Kawamura, the clerk, requested all to be seated. I chose one
in front of a pillar so I could lean against it. Badger sat in front of
the panel of Kaioku in Japanese full dress. On his left sat Red Shirt
similarly dressed, and on his right Hubbard Squash, as the guest of
honor, in the same kind of dress. I was dressed in a European suit, and
being unable to sit down, squatted on my legs at once. The teacher of
physical culture next to me, though in the same kind of rags as mine,
sat squarely in Japanese fashion. As a teacher of his line he appeared
to have well trained himself. Then the dinner trays were served and the
bottles placed beside them. The manager of the day stood up and made a
brief opening address. He was followed by Badger and Red Shirt. These
two made farewell addresses, and dwelt at length on Hubbard Squash being
an ideal teacher and gentleman, expressing their regret, saying his
departure was a great loss not only to the school but to them in person.
They concluded that it could not be helped, however, since the transfer
was due to his own earnest desire and for his own convenience. They
appeared to be ashamed not in the least by telling such a lie at a
farewell dinner. Particularly, Red Shirt, of these three, praised Hubard
Squash in lavish terms. He went so far as to declare that to lose this
true friend was a great personal loss to him. Moreover, his tone was so
impressive in its same old gentle tone that one who listens to him for
the first time would be sure to be misled. Probably he won the Madonna
by this same trick. While Red Shirt was uttering his farewell buncomb,
Porcupine who sat on the other side across me, winked at me. As an
answer of this, I "snooked" at him.

No sooner had Red Shirt sat down than Porcupine stood up, and highly
rejoiced, I clapped hands. At this Badger and others glanced at me, and
I felt that I blushed a little.

"Our principal and other gentlemen," he said, "particularly the head
teacher, expressed their sincere regret at Mr. Koga's transfer. I am of
a different opinion, and hope to see him leave the town at the earliest
possible moment. Nobeoka is an out-of-the-way, backwoods town, and
compared with this town, it may have more material inconveniences, but
according to what I have heard, Nobeoka is said to be a town where the
customs are simple and untainted, and the teachers and students still
strong in the straightforward characteristics of old days. I am
convinced that in Nobeoka there is not a single high-collared guy who
passes round threadbare remarks, or who with smooth face, entraps
innocent people. I am sure that a man like Mr. Koga, gentle and honest,
will surely be received with an enthusiastic welcome there. I heartily
welcome this transfer for the sake of Mr. Koga. In concluding, I hope
that when he is settled down at Nobeoka, he will find a lady qualified
to become his wife, and form a sweet home at an early date and
incidentally let the inconstant, unchaste sassy old wench die ashamed
...... a'hum, a'hum!"

He coughed twice significantly and sat down. I thought of clapping my
hands again, but as it would draw attention, I refrained. When
Porcupine finished his speech, Hubbard Squash arose politely, slipped
out of his seat, went to the furthest end of the room, and having bowed
to all in a most respectful manner, acknowledged the compliments in the
following way;

"On the occasion of my going to Kyushu for my personal convenience, I am
deeply impressed and appreciate the way my friends have honored me with
this magnificent dinner....... The farewell addresses by our principal
and other gentlemen will be long held in my fondest recollection.......
I am going far away now, but I hope my name be included in the future as
in the past in the list of friends of the gentlemen here to-night."

Then again bowing, he returned to his seat. There was no telling how far
the "good-naturedness" of Hubbard Squash might go. He had respectfully
thanked the principal and the head teacher who had been fooling him. And
it was not a formal, cut-and-dried reply he made, either; by his manner,
tone and face, he appeared to have been really grateful from his heart.
Badger and Red Shirt should have blushed when they were addressed so
seriously by so good a man as Hubbard Squash, but they only listened
with long faces.

After the exchange of addresses, a sizzling sound was heard here and
there, and I too tried the soup which tasted like anything but soup.
There was kamaboko in the kuchitori dish, but instead of being snow
white as it should be, it looked grayish, and was more like a poorly
cooked chikuwa. The sliced tunny was there, but not having been sliced
fine, passed the throat like so many pieces of chopped raw tunny. Those
around me, however, ate with ravenous appetite. They have not tasted, I
guess, the real Yedo dinner.

Meanwhile the bottles began passing round, and all became more or less
"jacked up." Clown proceeded to the front of the principal and
submissively drank to his health. A beastly fellow, this! Hubbard Squash
made a round of all the guests, drinking to their health. A very onerous
job, indeed. When he came to me and proposed my health, I abandoned the
squatting posture and sat up straight.

"Too bad to see you go away so soon. When are you going? I want to see
you off at the beach," I said.

"Thank you, Sir. But never mind that. You're busy," he declined. He
might decline, but I was determined to get excused for the day and give
him a rousing send-off.

Within about an hour from this, the room became pretty lively.

"Hey, have another, hic; ain't goin', hic, have one on me?" One or two
already in a pickled state appeared on the scene. I was little tired,
and going out to the porch, was looking at the old fashioned garden by
the dim star light, when Porcupine came.

"How did you like my speech? Wasn't it grand, though!" he remarked in a
highly elated tone. I protested that while I approved 99 per cent, of
his speech, there was one per cent, that I did not. "What's that one per
cent?" he asked.

"Well, you said,...... there is not a single high-collared guy who with
smooth face entraps innocent people......."

"Yes."

"A 'high-collared guy' isn't enough."

"Then what should I say?"

"Better say,--'a high-collared guy; swindler, bastard,
super-swanker, doubleface, bluffer, totempole, spotter, who looks
like a dog as he yelps.'"

"I can't get my tongue to move so fast. You're eloquent. In the first
place, you know a great many simple words. Strange that you can't make
a speech."

"I reserve these words for use when I chew the rag. If it comes to
speech-making, they don't come out so smoothly."

"Is that so? But they simply come a-running. Repeat that again for me."

"As many times as you like. Listen,--a high-collared guy, swindler,
bastard, super-swanker ..."

While I was repeating this, two shaky fellows came out of the room
hammering the floor.

"Hey, you two gents, if won't do to run away. Won't let you off while
I'm here. Come and have a drink. Bastard? That's fine. Bastardly fine.
Now, come on."

And they pulled Porcupine and me away. These two fellows really had come
to the lavatory, but soaked as they were, in booze bubbles, they
apparently forgot to proceed to their original destination, and were
pulling us hard. All booze fighters seem to be attracted by whatever
comes directly under their eyes for the moment and forget what they had
been proposing to do.

"Say, fellows, we've got bastards. Make them drink. Get them loaded. You
gents got to stay here."

And they pushed me who never attempted to escape against the wall.
Surveying the scene, I found there was no dish in which any edibles were
left. Some one had eaten all his share, and gone on a foraging
expedition. The principal was not there,--I did not know when he left.

At that time, preceded by a coquetish voice, three or four geishas
entered the room. I was a bit surprised, but having been pushed against
the wall, I had to look on quietly. At the instant, Red Shirt who had
been leaning against a pillar with the same old amber pipe stuck into
his mouth with some pride, suddenly got up and started to leave the
room. One of the geishas who was advancing toward him smiled and
courtesied at him as she passed by him. The geisha was the youngest and
prettiest of the bunch. They were some distance away from me and I could
not see very well, but it seemed that she might have said "Good
evening." Red Shirt brushed past as if unconscious, and never showed
again. Probably he followed the principal.

The sight of the geishas set the room immediately in a buzz and it
became noisy as they all raised howls of welcome. Some started the game
of "nanko" with a force that beat the sword-drawing practice. Others
began playing morra, and the way they shook their hands, intently
absorbed in the game, was a better spectacle than a puppet show.

One in the corner was calling "Hey, serve me here," but shaking the
bottle, corrected it to "Hey, fetch me more sake." The whole room
became so infernally noisy that I could scarcely stand it. Amid this
orgy, one, like a fish out of water, sat down with his head bowed. It
was Hubbard Squash. The reason they have held this farewell dinner
party was not in order to bid him a farewell, but because they wanted
to have a jolly good time for themselves with John Barleycorn. He had
come to suffer only. Such a dinner party would have been better had it
not been started at all.

After a while, they began singing ditties in outlandish voices. One of
the geishas came in front of me, and taking up a samisen, asked me to
sing something. I told her I didn't sing, but I'd like to hear, and she
droned out:

"If one can go round and meet the one he wants, banging gongs and drums
...... bang, bang, bang, bang, bing, shouting after wandering Santaro,
there is some one I'd like to meet by banging round gongs and drums
...... bang, bang, bang, bang, b-i-n-g."

She dashed this off in two breaths, and sighed, "O, dear!" She should
have sung something easier.

Clown who had come near us meanwhile, remarked in his flippant tone:

"Hello, dear Miss Su-chan, too bad to see your beau go away so soon."
The geisha pouted, "I don't know." Clown, regardless, began imitating
"gidayu" with a dismal voice,--"What a luck, when she met her sweet
heart by a rare chance...."

The geisha slapped the lap of Clown with a "Cut that out," and Clown
gleefully laughed. This geisha is the one who made goo-goo eyes[J] at
Red Shirt. What a simpleton, to be pleased by the slap of a geisha, this
Clown. He said:

"Say, Su-chan, strike up the string. I'm going to dance the Kiino-kuni."
He seemed yet to dance.

On other side of the room, the old man of Confucius, twisting round his
toothless mouth, had finished as far as "...... dear Dembei-san" and is
asking a geisha who sat in front of him to couch him for the rest. Old
people seem to need polishing up their memorizing system. One geisha is
talking to the teacher of natural history:

"Here's the latest. I'll sing it. Just listen. 'Margaret, the
high-collared head with a white ribbon; she rides on a bike, plays a
violin, and talks in broken English,--I am glad to see you.'" Natural
history appears impressed, and says;

"That's an interesting piece. English in it too."

Porcupine called "geisha, geisha," in a loud voice, and commanded; "Bang
your samisen; I'm going to dance a sword-dance."

His manner was so rough that the geishas were startled and did not
answer. Porcupine, unconcerned, brought out a cane, and began performing
the sword-dance in the center of the room. Then Clown, having danced the
Kii-no-kuni, the Kap-pore[K] and the Durhma-san on the Shelf, almost
stark-naked, with a palm-fibre broom, began turkey-trotting about the
room, shouting "The Sino-Japanese negotiations came to a break......."
The whole was a crazy sight.

I had been feeling sorry for Hubbard Squash, who up to this time had sat
up straight in his full dress. Even were this a farewell dinner held in
his honor, I thought he was under no obligation to look patiently in a
formal dress at the naked dance. So I went to him and persuaded him with
"Say, Koga-san, let's go home." Hubbard Squash said the dinner was in
his honor, and it would be improper for him to leave the room before the
guests. He seemed to be determined to remain.

"What do you care!" I said, "If this is a farewell dinner, make it like
one. Look at those fellows; they're just like the inmates of a lunatic
asylum. Let's go."

And having forced hesitating Hubbard Squash to his feet, we were
just leaving the room, when Clown, marching past, brandishing the
broom, saw us.

"This won't do for the guest of honor to leave before us," he hollered,
"this is the Sino-Japanese negotiations. Can't let you off." He enforced
his declaration by holding the broom across our way. My temper had been
pretty well aroused for some time, and I felt impatient.

"The Sino-Japanese negotiation, eh? Then you're a Chink," and I whacked
his head with a knotty fist.

This sudden blow left Clown staring blankly speechless for a second or
two; then he stammered out:

"This is going some! Mighty pity to knock my head. What a blow on this
Yoshikawa! This makes the Sino-Japanese negotiations the sure stuff."

While Clown was mumbling these incoherent remarks, Porcupine, believing
some kind of row had been started, ceased his sword-dance and came
running toward us. On seeing us, he grabbed the neck of Clown and
pulled him back.

"The Sino-Japane......ouch!......ouch! This is outrageous," and Clown
writhed under the grip of Porcupine who twisted him sideways and threw
him down on the floor with a bang. I do not know the rest. I parted from
Hubbard Squash on the way, and it was past eleven when I returned home.



CHAPTER X.


The town is going to celebrate a Japanese victory to-day, and there is
no school. The celebration is to be held at the parade ground, and
Badger is to take out all the students and attend the ceremony. As one
of the instructors, I am to go with them. The streets are everywhere
draped with flapping national flags almost enough to dazzle the eyes.
There were as many as eight hundred students in all, and it was
arranged, under the direction of the teacher of physical culture to
divide them into sections with one teacher or two to lead them. The
arrangement itself was quite commendable, but in its actual operation
the whole thing went wrong. All students are mere kiddies who, ever too
fresh, regard it as beneath their dignity not to break all regulations.
This rendered the provision of teachers among them practically useless.
They would start marching songs without being told to, and if they
ceased the marching songs, they would raise devilish shouts without
cause. Their behavior would have done credit to the gang of tramps
parading the streets demanding work. When they neither sing nor shout,
they tee-hee and giggle. Why they cannot walk without these disorder,
passes my understanding, but all Japanese are born with their mouths
stuck out, and no kick will ever be strong enough to stop it. Their
chatter is not only of simple nature, but about the teachers when their
back is turned. What a degraded bunch! I made the students apologize to
me on the dormitory affair, and considered the incident closed. But I
was mistaken. To borrow the words of the old lady in the boarding house,
I was surely wrong Mr. Wright. The apology they offered was not prompted
by repentance in their hearts. They had kowtowed as a matter of form by
the command of the principal. Like the tradespeople who bow their heads
low but never give up cheating the public, the students apologize but
never stop their mischiefs. Society is made up, I think it probable, of
people just like those students. One may be branded foolishly honest if
he takes seriously the apologies others might offer. We should regard
all apologies a sham and forgiving also as a sham; then everything would
be all right. If one wants to make another apologize from his heart, he
has to pound him good and strong until he begs for mercy from his heart.

As I walked along between the sections, I could hear constantly the
voices mentioning "tempura" or "dango." And as there were so many of
them, I could not tell which one mentioned it. Even if I succeeded in
collaring the guilty one I was sure of his saying, "No, I didn't mean
you in saying tempura or dango. I fear you suffer from nervousness and
make wrong inferences." This dastardly spirit has been fostered from the
time of the feudal lords, and is deep-rooted. No amount of teaching or
lecturing will cure it. If I stay in a town like this for one year or
so, I may be compelled to follow their example, who knows,--clean and
honest though I have been. I do not propose to make a fool of myself by
remaining quiet when others attempt to play games on me, with all their
excuses ready-made. They are men and so am I--students or kiddies or
whatever they may be. They are bigger than I, and unless I get even with
them by punishment, I would cut a sorry figure. But in the attempt to
get even, if I resort to ordinary means, they are sure to make it a
boomerang. If I tell them, "You're wrong," they will start an eloquent
defence, because they are never short of the means of sidestepping.
Having defended themselves, and made themselves appear suffering
martyrs, they would begin attacking me. As the incident would have been
started by my attempting to get even with them, my defence would not be
a defence until I can prove their wrong. So the quarrel, which they had
started, might be mistaken, after all, as one begun by me. But the more
I keep silent the more they would become insolent, which, speaking
seriously, could not be permitted for the sake of public morale. In
consequence, I am obliged to adopt an identical policy so they cannot
catch men in playing it back on them. If the situation comes to that, it
would be the last day of the Yedo kid. Even so, if I am to be subjected
to these pin-pricking[L] tricks, I am a man and got to risk losing off
the last remnant of the honor of the Yedo kid. I became more convinced
of the advisability of returning to Tokyo quickly and living with Kiyo.
To live long in such a countrytown would be like degrading myself for a
purpose. Newspaper delivering would be preferable to being degraded so
far as that.

I walked along with a sinking heart, thinking like this, when the head
of our procession became suddenly noisy, and the whole came to a full
stop. I thought something has happened, stepped to the right out of the
ranks, and looked toward the direction of the noise. There on the corner
of Otemachi, turning to Yakushimachi, I saw a mass packed full like
canned sardines, alternately pushing back and forth. The teacher of
physical culture came down the line hoarsely shouting to all to be
quiet. I asked him what was the matter, and he said the middle school
and the normal had come to a clash at the corner.

The middle school and the normal, I understood, are as much friendly as
dogs and monkeys. It is not explained why but their temper was
hopelessly crossed, and each would try to knock the chip off the
shoulder of the other on all occasions. I presume they quarrel so much
because life gets monotonous in this backwoods town. I am fond of
fighting, and hearing of the clash, darted forward to make the most of
the fun. Those foremost in the line are jeering, "Get out of the way,
you country tax!"[12] while those in the rear are hollowing "Push them
out!" I passed through the students, and was nearing the corner, when I
heard a sharp command of "Forward!" and the line of the normal school
began marching on. The clash which had resulted from contending for the
right of way was settled, but it was settled by the middle school giving
way to the normal. From the point of school-standing the normal is said
to rank above the middle.

[Footnote 12: The normal school in the province maintains the students
mostly on the advance-expense system, supported by the country tax.]

The ceremony was quite simple. The commander of the local brigade read a
congratulatory address, and so did the governor, and the audience
shouted banzais. That was all. The entertainments were scheduled for the
afternoon, and I returned home once and started writing to Kiyo an
answer which had been in my mind for some days. Her request had been
that I should write her a letter with more detailed news; so I must get
it done with care. But as I took up the rolled letter-paper, I did not
know with what I should begin, though I have many things to write about.

Should I begin with that? That is too much trouble. Or with this? It is
not interesting. Isn't there something which will come out smoothly, I
reflected, without taxing my head too much, and which will interest
Kiyo. There seemed, however, no such item as I wanted I grated the
ink-cake, wetted the writing brush, stared at the letter-paper--stared
at the letter-paper, wetted the writing brush, grated the ink-cake--and,
having repeated the same thing several times, I gave up the letter
writing as not in my line, and covered the lid of the stationery box. To
write a letter was a bother. It would be much simpler to go back to
Tokyo and see Kiyo. Not that I am unconcerned about the anxiety of Kiyo,
but to get up a letter to please the fancy of Kiyo is a harder job than
to fast for three weeks.

I threw down the brush and letter-paper, and lying down with my bent
arms as a pillow, gazed at the garden. But the thought of the letter to
Kiyo would come back in my mind. Then I thought this way; If I am
thinking of her from my heart, even at such a distance, my sincerity
would find responsive appreciation in Kiyo. If it does find response,
there is no need of sending letters. She will regard the absence of
letters from me as a sign of my being in good health. If I write in case
of illness or when something unusual happens, that will be sufficient.

The garden is about thirty feet square, with no particular plants worthy
of name. There is one orange tree which is so tall as to be seen above
the board fence from outside. Whenever I returned from the school I used
to look at this orange tree. For to those who had not been outside of
Tokyo, oranges on the tree are rather a novel sight. Those oranges now
green will ripen by degrees and turn to yellow, when the tree would
surely be beautiful. There are some already ripened. The old lady told
me that they are juicy, sweet oranges. "They will all soon be ripe, and
then help yourself to all you want," she said. I think I will enjoy a
few every day. They will be just right in about three weeks. I do not
think I will have to leave the town in so short a time as three weeks.

While my attention was centered on the oranges, Porcupine[M] came in.

"Say, to-day being the celebration[N] of victory, I thought I would get
something good to eat with you, and bought some beef."

So saying, he took out a package covered with a bamboo-wrapper, and
threw it down in the center of the room. I had been denied the pleasure
of patronizing the noodle house or dango shop, on top of getting sick of
the sweet potatoes and tofu, and I welcomed the suggestion with "That's
fine," and began cooking it with a frying pan and some sugar borrowed
from the old lady.

Porcupine, munching the beef to the full capacity of his mouth, asked me
if I knew Red Shirt having a favorite geisha. I asked if that was not
one of the geishas who came to our dinner the other night, and he
answered, "Yes, I got the wind of the fact only recently; you're sharp."

"Red Shirt always speaks of refinement of character or of mental
consolation, but he is making a fool of himself by chasing round a
geisha. What a dandy rogue. We might let that go if he wouldn't make
fuss about others making fools of themselves. I understand through the
principal he stopped your going even to noodle houses or dango shops as
unbecoming to the dignity of the school, didn't he?"

"According to his idea, running after a geisha is a mental consolation
but tempura or dango is a material pleasure, I guess. If that's mental
consolation, why doesn't the fool do it above board? You ought to see
the jacknape skipping out of the room when the geisha came into it the
other night,--I don't like his trying to deceive us, but if one were to
point it out for him, he would deny it or say it was the Russian
literature or that the haiku is a half-brother of the new poetry, and
expect to hush it up by twaddling soft nonsense. A weak-knee like him is
not a man. I believe he lived the life of a court-maid in former life.
Perhaps his daddy might have been a kagema at Yushima in old days."

"What is a kagema?"

"I suppose something very unmanly,--sort of emasculated chaps. Say, that
part isn't cooked enough. It might give you tape worm."

"So? I think it's all right. And, say, Red Shirt is said to frequent
Kadoya at the springs town and meet his geisha there, but he keeps
it in dark."

"Kadoya? That hotel?"

"Also a restaurant. So we've got to catch him there with his geisha and
make it hot for him right to his face."

"Catch him there? Suppose we begin a kind of night watch?"

"Yes, you know there is a rooming house called Masuya in front of
Kadoya. We'll rent one room upstairs of the house, and keep peeping
through a loophole we could make in the shoji."

"Will he come when we keep peeping at him?"

"He may. We will have to do it more than one night. Must expect to keep
it up for at least two weeks."

"Say, that would make one pretty well tired, I tell you. I sat up every
night for about one week attending my father when he died, and it left
me thoroughly down and out for some time afterward."

"I don't care if I do get tired some. A crook like Red Shirt should not
go unpunished that way for the honor of Japan, and I am going to
administer a chastisement in behalf of heaven."

"Hooray! If things are decided upon that way, I am game. And we are
going to start from to-night?"

"I haven't rented a room at Masuya yet, so can't start it to-night."

"Then when?"

"Will start before long. I'll let you know, and want you help me."

"Right-O. I will help you any time. I am not much myself at scheming,
but I am IT when it comes to fighting."

While Porcupine and I were discussing the plan of subjugating Red Shirt,
the old lady appeared at the door, announcing that a student was wanting
to see Professor Hotta. The student had gone to his house, but seeing
him out, had come here as probable to find him. Porcupine went to the
front door himself, and returning to the room after a while, said:

"Say, the boy came to invite us to go and see the entertainment of the
celebration. He says there is a big bunch of dancers from Kochi to dance
something, and it would be a long time before we could see the like of
it again. Let's go."

Porcupine seemed enthusiastic over the prospect of seeing that dance,
and induced me to go with him. I have seen many kinds of dance in Tokyo.
At the annual festival of the Hachiman Shrine, moving stages come around
the district, and I have seen the Shiokukmi and almost any other
variety. I was little inclined to see that dance by the sturdy fellows
from Tosa province, but as Porcupine was so insistent, I changed my mind
and followed him out. I did not know the student who came to invite
Porcupine, but found he was the younger brother of Red Shirt. Of all
students, what a strange choice for a messenger!

The celebration ground was decorated, like the wrestling amphitheater at
Ryogoku during the season, or the annual festivity of the Hommonji
temple, with long banners planted here and there, and on the ropes that
crossed and recrossed in the mid-air were strung the colors of all
nations, as if they were borrowed from as many nations for the occasion
and the large roof presented unusually cheerful aspect. On the eastern
corner there was built a temporary stage upon which the dance of Koehi
was to be performed. For about half a block, with the stage on the
right, there was a display of flowers and plant settings arranged on
shelves sheltered with reed screens. Everybody was looking at the
display seemingly much impressed, but it failed to impress me. If
twisted grasses or bamboos afforded so much pleasure, the gallantry of a
hunchback or the husband of a wrong pair should give as much pleasure to
their eyes.

In the opposite direction, aerial bombs and fire works were steadily
going on. A balloon shot out on which was written "Long Live the
Empire!" It floated leisurely over the pine trees near the castle
tower, and fell down inside the compound of the barracks. Bang! A black
ball shot up against the serene autumn sky; burst open straight above
my head, streams of luminous green smoke ran down in an umbrella-shape,
and finally faded. Then another balloon. It was red with "Long Live the
Army and Navy" in white. The wind slowly carried it from the town
toward the Aioi village. Probably it would fall into the yard of Kwanon
temple there.

At the formal celebration this morning there were not quite so many as
here now. It was surging mass that made me wonder how so many people
lived in the place. There were not many attractive faces among the
crowd, but as far as the numerical strength went, it was a formidable
one. In the meantime that dance had begun. I took it for granted that
since they call it a dance, it would be something similar to the kind of
dance by the Fujita troupe, but I was greatly mistaken.

Thirty fellows, dressed up in a martial style, in three rows of ten
each, stood with glittering drawn swords. The sight was an eye-opener,
indeed. The space between the rows measured about two feet, and that
between the men might have been even less. One stood apart from the
group. He was similarly dressed but instead of a drawn sword, he carried
a drum hung about his chest. This fellow drawled out signals the tone of
which suggested a mighty easy-life, and then croaking a strange song, he
would strike the drum. The tune was outlandishly unfamiliar. One might
form the idea by thinking it a combination of the Mikawa Banzai and the
Fudarakuya.

The song was drowsy, and like syrup in summer is dangling and slovenly.
He struck the drum to make stops at certain intervals. The tune was kept
with regular rhythmical order, though it appeared to have neither head
nor tail. In response to this tune, the thirty drawn swords flash, with
such dexterity and speed that the sight made the spectator almost
shudder. With live men within two feet of their position, the sharp
drawn blades, each flashing them in the same manner, they looked as if
they might make a bloody mess unless they were perfectly accurate in
their movements. If it had been brandishing swords alone without moving
themselves, the chances of getting slashed or cut might have been less,
but sometimes they would turn sideways together, or clear around, or
bend their knees. Just one second's difference in the movement, either
too quick or too late, on the part of the next fellow, might have meant
sloughing off a nose or slicing off the head of the next fellow. The
drawn swords moved in perfect freedom, but the sphere of action was
limited to about two feet square, and to cap it all, each had to keep
moving with those in front and back, at right and left, in the same
direction at the same speed. This beats me! The dance of the Shiokumi or
the Sekinoto would make no show compared with this! I heard them say the
dance requires much training, and it could not be an easy matter to make
so many dancers move in a unison like this. Particularly difficult part
in the dance was that of the fellow with drum stuck to his chest. The
movement of feet, action of hands, or bending of knees of those thirty
fellows were entirely directed by the tune with which he kept them
going. To the spectators this fellow's part appeared the easiest. He
sang in a lazy tune, but it was strange that he was the fellow who takes
the heaviest responsibility.

While Porcupine and I, deeply impressed, were looking at the dance with
absorbing interest, a sudden hue and cry was raised about half a block
off. A commotion was started among those who had been quietly enjoying
the sights and all ran pell-mell in every direction. Some one was heard
saying "fight!" Then the younger brother of Red Shirt came running
forward through the crowd.

"Please, Sir," he panted, "a row again! The middles are going to get
even with the normals and have just begun fighting. Come quick, Sir!"
And he melted somewhere into the crowd.

"What troublesome brats! So they're at it again, eh? Why can't
they stop it!"

Porcupine, as he spoke, dashed forward, dodging among the running crowd.
He meant, I think, to stop the fight, because he could not be an idle
spectator once he was informed of the fact. I of course had no intention
of turning tail, and hastened on the heels of Porcupine. The fight was
in its fiercest. There were about fifty to sixty normals, and the
middles numbered by some ninety. The normals wore uniform, but the
middles had discarded their uniform and put on Japanese civilian
clothes, which made the distinction between the two hostile camps easy.
But they were so mixed up, and wrangling with such violence, that we did
not know how and where we could separate them.

Porcupine, apparently at a loss what to do, looked at the wild scene
awhile, then turned to me, saying:

"Let's jump in and separate them. It will be hell if cops get on them."

I did not answer, but rushed to the spot where the scuffle appeared
most violent.

"Stop there! Cut this out! You're ruining the name of the school! Stop
this, dash you!"

Shouting at the top of my voice, I attempted to penetrate the line which
seemed to separate the hostile sides, but this attempt did not succeed.
When about ten feet into the turmoil, I could neither advance nor
retreat. Right in my front, a comparatively large normal was grappling
with a middle about sixteen years of ago.

"Stop that!"

I grabbed the shoulder of the normal and tried to force them apart when
some one whacked my feet. On this sudden attack, I let go the normal and
fell down sideways. Some one stepped on my back with heavy shoes. With
both hands and knees upon the ground, I jumped up and the fellow on my
back rolled off to my right. I got up, and saw the big body of Porcupine
about twenty feet away, sandwiched between the students, being pushed
back and forth, shouting, "Stop the fight! Stop that!"

"Say, we can't do anything!" I hollered at him, but unable to hear, I
think, he did not answer.

A pebble-stone whiffled through the air and hit squarely on my cheek
bone; the same moment some one banged my back with a heavy stick
from behind.

"Profs mixing in!" "Knock them down!" was shouted.

"Two of them; big one and small. Throw stones at them!" Another shout.

"Drat you fresh jackanapes!" I cried as I wallopped the head of a normal
nearby. Another stone grazed my head, and passed behind me. I did not
know what had become of Porcupine, I could not find him. Well, I could
not help it but jumped into the teapot to stop the tempest. I wasn't[O]
a Hottentot to skulk away on being shot at with pebble-stones. What did
they think I was anyway! I've been through all kinds of fighting in
Tokyo, and can take in all fights one may care to give me. I slugged,
jabbed and banged the stuffing out of the fellow nearest to me. Then
some one cried, "Cops! Cops! Cheese it! Beat it!" At that moment, as if
wading through a pond of molasses, I could hardly move, but the next I
felt suddenly released and both sides scampered off simultaneously. Even
the country fellows do creditable work when it comes to retreating, more
masterly than General Kuropatkin, I might say.

I searched for Porcupine who, I found his overgown torn to shreds, was
wiping his nose. He bled considerably, and his nose having swollen was a
sight. My clothes were pretty well massed with dirt, but I had not
suffered quite as much damage as Porcupine. I felt pain in my cheek and
as Porcupine said, it bled some.

About sixteen police officers arrived at the scene but, all the students
having beat it in opposite directions, all they were able to catch were
Porcupine and me. We gave them our names and explained the whole story.
The officers requested us to follow them to the police station which we
did, and after stating to the chief of police what had happened, we
returned home.



CHAPTER XI.


The next morning on awakening I felt pains all over my body, due, I
thought, to having had no fight for a long time. This is not creditable
to my fame as regards fighting, so I thought while in bed, when the old
lady brought me a copy of the Shikoku Shimbun. I felt so weak as to need
some effort even reaching for the paper. But what should be man so
easily upset by such a trifling affair,--so I forced myself to turn in
bed, and, opening its second page, I was surprised. There was the whole
story of the fight of yesterday in print. Not that I was surprised by
the news of the fight having been published, but it said that one
teacher Hotta of the Middle School and one certain saucy Somebody,
recently from Tokyo, of the same institution, not only started this
trouble by inciting the students, but were actually present at the scene
of the trouble, directing the students and engaged themselves against
the students of the Normal School. On top of this, something of the
following effect was added.

"The Middle School in this prefecture has been an object of admiration
by all other schools for its good and ideal behavior. But since this
long-cherished honor has been sullied by these two irresponsible
persons, and this city made to suffer the consequent indignity, we have
to bring the perpetrators to full account. We trust that before we take
any step in this matter, the authorities will have those 'toughs'
properly punished, barring them forever from our educational circles."

All the types were italicized, as if they meant to administer
typographical chastisement upon us. "What the devil do I care!" I
shouted, and up I jumped out of bed. Strange to say, the pain in my
joints became tolerable.

I rolled up the newspaper and threw it into the garden. Not satisfied, I
took that paper to the cesspool and dumped it there. Newspapers tell
such reckless lies. There is nothing so adept, I believe, as the
newspaper in circulating lies. It has said what I should have said. And
what does it mean by "one saucy Somebody who is recently from Tokyo?" Is
there any one in this wide world with the name of Somebody? Don't
forget, I have a family and personal name of my own which I am proud of.
If they want to look at my family-record, they will bow before every one
of my ancestors from Mitsunaka Tada down. Having washed my face, my
cheek began suddenly smarting. I asked the old lady for a mirror, and
she asked if I had read the paper of this morning. "Yes," I said, "and
dumped it in the cesspool; go and pick it up if you want it,"--and she
withdrew with a startled look. Looking in the mirror, I saw bruises on
my cheek. Mine is a precious face to me. I get my face bruised, and am
called a saucy Somebody as if I were nobody. That is enough.

It will be a reflection on my honor to the end of my days if it is said
that I shunned the public gaze and kept out of the school on account of
the write-up in the paper. So, after the breakfast, I attended the
school ahead of all. One after the other, all coming to the school would
grin at my face. What is there to laugh about! This face is my own,
gotten up, I am sure, without the least obligation on their part. By and
by, Clown appeared.

"Ha, heroic action yesterday. Wounds of honor, eh?"

He made this sarcastic remark, I suppose, in revenge for the knock he
received on his head from me at the farewell dinner.

"Cut out nonsense; you get back there and suck your old drawing
brushes!" Then he answered "that was going some," and enquired if it
pained much?

"Pain or no pain, this is my face. That's none of your business," I
snapped back in a furious temper. Then Clown took his seat on the other
side, and still keeping his eye on me, whispered and laughed with the
teacher of history next to him.

Then came Porcupine. His nose had swollen and was purple,--it was a
tempting object for a surgeon's knife. His face showed far worse (is it
my conceit that make this comparison?) than mine. I and Porcupine are
chums with desks next to each other, and moreover, as ill-luck would
have it, the desks are placed right facing the door. Thus were two
strange faces placed together. The other fellows, when in want of
something to divert them, would gaze our way with regularity. They say
"too bad," but they are surely laughing in their minds as "ha, these
fools!" If that is not so, there is no reason for their whispering
together and grinning like that. In the class room, the boys clapped
their hands when I entered; two or three of them banzaied. I could not
tell whether it was an enthusiastic approval or open insult. While I and
Porcupine were thus being made the cynosures of the whole school, Red
Shirt came to me as usual.

"Too bad, my friend; I am very sorry indeed for you gentlemen," he said
in a semi-apologetic manner. "I've talked with the principal in regard
to the story in the paper, and have arranged to demand that the paper
retract the report, so you needn't worry on that score. You were plunged
into the trouble because my brother invited Mr. Hotta, and I don't know
how I can apologize you! I'm going to do my level best in this matter;
you gentlemen please depend on that." At the third hour recess the
principal came out of his room, and seemed more or less perturbed,
saying, "The paper made a bad mess of it, didn't it? I hope the matter
will not become serious."

As to anxiety, I have none. If they propose to relieve me, I intend
to tender my resignation before I get fired,--that's all. However, if
I resign with no fault on my part, I would be simply giving the paper
advantage. I thought it proper to make the paper take back what it
had said, and stick to my position. I was going to the newspaper
office to give them a piece of my mind on my way back but having been
told that the school had already taken steps to have the story
retracted, I did not.

Porcupine and I saw the principal and Red Shirt at a convenient hour,
giving them a faithful version of the incident. The principal and Red
Shirt agreed that the incident must have been as we said and that the
paper bore some grudge against the school and purposely published such a
story. Red Shirt made a round of personal visits on each teacher in the
room, defending and explaining our action in the affair. Particularly he
dwelt upon the fact that his brother invited Porcupine and it was his
fault. All teachers denounced the paper as infamous and agreed that we
two deserved sympathy.

On our way home, Porcupine warned me that Red Shirt smelt suspicious,
and we would be done unless we looked out. I said he had been smelling
some anyway,--it was not necessarily so just from to-day. Then he said
that it was his trick to have us invited and mixed in the fight
yesterday,--"Aren't you on to that yet?" Well, I was not. Porcupine was
quite a Grobian but he was endowed, I was impressed, with a better
brain than I.

"He made us mix into the trouble, and slipped behind and contrived to
have the paper publish the story. What a devil!"

"Even the newspaper in the band wagon of Red Shirt? That surprises me.
But would the paper listen to Red Shirt so easily?"

"Wouldn't it, though. Darn easy thing if one has friends in the
paper."[P]

"Has he any?"

"Suppose he hasn't, still that's easy. Just tell lies and say such and
such are facts, and the paper will take it up."

"A startling revelation, this. If that was really a trick of Red Shirt,
we're likely to be discharged on account of this affair."

"Quite likely we may be discharged."

"Then I'll tender my resignation tomorrow, and back to Tokyo I go. I am
sick of staying in such a wretched hole."

"Your resignation wouldn't make Red Shirt squeal."

"That's so. How can he be made to squeal?"

"A wily guy like him always plots not to leave any trace behind, and it
would be difficult to follow his track."

"What a bore! Then we have to stand in a false light, eh? Damn it! I
call all kinds of god to witness if this is just and right!"

"Let's wait for two or three days and see how it turns out. And if
we can't do anything else, we will have to catch him at the hot
springs town."

"Leaving this fight affair a separate case?"

"Yes. We'll have to his hit weak spot with our own weapon."

"That may be good. I haven't much to say in planning it out; I leave it
to you and will do anything at your bidding."

I parted from Porcupine then. If Red Shirt was really instrumental in
bringing us two into the trouble as Porcupine supposed, he certainly
deserves to be called down. Red Shirt outranks us in brainy work. And
there is no other course open but to appeal to physical force. No wonder
we never see the end of war in the world. Among individuals, it is,
after all, the question of superiority of the fist.

Next day I impatiently glanced over the paper, the arrival of which I
had been waiting with eagerness, but not a correction of the news or
even a line of retraction could be found. I pressed the matter on
Badger when I went to the school, and he said it might probably appear
tomorrow. On that "tomorrow" a line of retraction was printed in tiny
types. But the paper did not make any correction of the story. I called
the attention of Badger to the fact, and he replied that that was about
all that could be done under the circumstance. The principal, with the
face like a badger and always swaggering, is surprisingly, wanting in
influence. He has not even as much power as to bring down a country
newspaper, which had printed a false story. I was so thoroughly
indignant that I declared I would go alone to the office and see the
editor-in-chief on the subject, but Badger said no.

"If you go there and have a blowup with the editor," he continued, "it
would only mean of your being handed out worse stuff in the paper again.
Whatever is published in a paper, right or wrong, nothing can be done
with it." And he wound up with a remark that sounded like a piece of
sermon by a Buddhist bonze that "We must be contented by speedily
despatching the matter from our minds and forgetting it."

If newspapers are of that character, it would be beneficial for us all
to have them suspended,--the sooner the better. The similarity of the
unpleasant sensation of being written-up in a paper and being
bitten-down by a turtle became plain for the first time by the
explanation of Badger.

About three days afterward, Porcupine came to me excited, and said that
the time has now come, that he proposes to execute that thing we had
planned out. Then I will do so, I said, and readily agreed to join him.
But Porcupine jerked his head, saying that I had better not. I asked him
why, and he asked if I had been requested by the principal to tender my
resignation. No, I said, and asked if he had. He told me that he was
called by the principal who was very, very sorry for him but under the
circumstance requested him to decide to resign.

"That isn't fair. Badger probably had been pounding his belly-drum too
much and his stomach is upside down," I said, "you and I went to the
celebration, looked at the glittering sword dance together, and jumped
into the fight together to stop it. Wasn't it so? If he wants you to
tender your resignation, he should be impartial and should have asked me
to also. What makes everything in the country school so dull-head. This
is irritating!"

"That's wire-pulling by Red Shirt," he said. "I and Red Shirt cannot go
along together, but they think you can be left as harmless."

"I wouldn't get along with that Red Shirt either. Consider me harmless,
eh? They're getting too gay with me."

"You're so simple and straight that they think they can handle you in
any old way."

"Worse still. I wouldn't get along with him, I tell you."

"Besides, since the departure of Koga, his successor has not arrived.
Furthermore, if they fire me and you together, there will be blank spots
in the schedule hours at the school."

"Then they expect me to play their game. Darn the fellow! See if they
can make me."

On going to the school next day I made straightway for the room of the
principal and started firing;

"Why don't you ask me to put in my resignation?" I said.

"Eh?" Badger stared blankly.

"You requested Hotta to resign, but not me. Is that right?"

"That is on account of the condition of the school......"

"That condition is wrong, I dare say. If I don't have to resign, there
should be no necessity for Hotta to resign either."

"I can't offer a detailed explanation about that......as to Hotta, it
cannot be helped if he goes...... ......we see no need of your
resigning."

Indeed, he is a badger. He jabbers something, dodging the point, but
appears complacent. So I had to say:

"Then, I will tender my resignation. You might have thought that I
would remain peacefully while Mr. Hotta is forced to resign, but I
cannot do it"

"That leaves us in a bad fix. If Hotta goes away and you follow him, we
can't teach mathematics here."

"None of my business if you can't."

"Say, don't be so selfish. You ought to consider the condition of the
school. Besides, if it is said that you resigned within one month of
starting a new job, it would affect your record in the future. You
should consider that point also."

"What do I care about my record. Obligation is more important
than record."

"That's right. What you say is right, but be good enough to take our
position into consideration. If you insist on resigning, then resign,
but please stay until we get some one to take your place. At any rate,
think the matter over once more, please."

The reason was so plain as to discourage any attempt to think it over,
but as I took some pity on Badger whose face reddened or paled
alternately as he spoke, I withdrew on the condition that I would think
the matter over. I did not talk with Red Shirt. If I have to land him
one, it was better, I thought, to have it bunched together and make it
hot and strong.

I acquainted Porcupine with the details of my meeting with Badger. He
said he had expected it to be about so, and added that the matter of
resignation can be left alone without causing me any embarrassment
until the time comes. So I followed his advice. Porcupine appears
somewhat smarter than I, and I have decided to accept whatever advices
he may give.

Porcupine finally tendered his resignation, and having bidden farewell
of all the fellow teachers, went down to Minato-ya on the beach. But he
stealthily returned to the hot springs town, and having rented a front
room upstairs of Masuya, started peeping through the hole he fingered
out in the shoji. I am the only person who knows of this. If Red Shirt
comes round, it would be night anyway, and as he is liable to be seen by
students or some others during the early part in the evening, it would
surely be after nine. For the first two nights, I was on the watch till
about 11 o'clock, but no sight of Red Shirt was seen. On the third
night, I kept peeping through from nine to ten thirty, but he did not
come. Nothing made me feel more like a fool than returning to the
boarding house at midnight after a fruitless watch. In four or five
days, our old lady began worrying about me and advised me to quit night
prowling,--being married. My night prowling is different from that kind
of night prowling. Mine is that of administering a deserved
chastisement. But then, when no encouragement is in sight after one
week, it becomes tiresome. I am quick tempered, and get at it with all
zeal when my interest is aroused, and would sit up all night to work it
out, but I have never shone in endurance. However loyal a member of the
heavenly-chastisement league I may be, I cannot escape monotony. On the
sixth night I was a little tired, and on the seventh thought I would
quit. Porcupine, however, stuck to it with bull-dog tenacity. From early
in the evening up to past twelve, he would glue his eye to the shoji and
keep steadily watching under the gas globe of Kadoya. He would surprise
me, when I come into the room, with figures showing how many patrons
there were to-day, how many stop-overs and how many women, etc. Red
Shirt seems never to be coming, I said, and he would fold his arms,
audibly sighing, "Well, he ought to." If Red Shirt would not come just
for once, Porcupine would be deprived of the chance of handing out a
deserved and just punishment.

I left my boarding house about 7 o'clock on the eighth night and after
having enjoyed my bath, I bought eight raw eggs. This would counteract
the attack of sweet potatoes by the old lady. I put the eggs into my
right and left pockets, four in each, with the same old red towel hung
over my shoulder, my hands inside my coat, went to Masuya. I opened the
shoji of the room and Porcupine greeted me with his Idaten-like face
suddenly radiant, saying:

"Say, there's hope! There's hope!" Up to last night, he had been
downcast, and even I felt gloomy. But at his cheerful countenance, I too
became cheerful, and before hearing anything, I cried, "Hooray! Hooray!"

"About half past seven this evening," he said, "that geisha named Kosuzu
has gone into Kadoya."

"With Red Shirt?"

"No."

"That's no good then."

"There were two geishas......seems to me somewhat hopeful."

"How?"

"How? Why, the sly old fox is likely to send his girls ahead[Q], and
sneak round behind later."

"That may be the case. About nine now, isn't it?"

"About twelve minutes past nine," said he, pulling out a watch with
a nickel case, "and, say put out the light. It would be funny to
have two silhouettes of bonze heads on the shoji. The fox is too
ready to suspect."

I blew out the lamp which stood upon the lacquer-enameled table. The
shoji alone was dimly plain by the star light. The moon has not come up
yet. I and Porcupine put our faces close to the shoji, watching almost
breathless. A wall clock somewhere rang half past nine.

"Say, will he come to-night, do you think? If he doesn't show up, I
quit."

"I'm going to keep this up while my money lasts."

"Money? How much have you?"

"I've paid five yen and sixty sen up to to-day for eight days. I pay my
bill every night, so I can jump out anytime."

"That's well arranged. The people of this hotel must have been rather
put out, I suppose."

"That's all right with the hotel; only I can't take my mind off
the house."

"But you take some sleep in daytime."

"Yes, I take a nap, but it's nuisance because I can't go out."

"Heavenly chastisement is a hard job, I'm sure," I said. "If he gives
us the slip after giving us such trouble, it would have been a
thankless task."

"Well, I'm sure he will come to-night...--... Look, look!" His voice
changed to whisper and I was alert in a moment. A fellow with a black
hat looked up at the gas light of Kadoya and passed on into the
darkness. No, it was not Red Shirt. Disappointing, this! Meanwhile the
clock at the office below merrily tinkled off ten. It seems to be
another bum watch to-night.

The streets everywhere had become quiet. The drum playing in the
tenderloin reached our ears distinctively. The moon had risen from
behind the hills of the hot springs. It is very light outside. Then
voices were heard below. We could not poke our heads out of the window,
so were unable to see the owners of the voices, but they were evidently
coming nearer. The dragging of komageta (a kind of wooden footwear) was
heard. They approached so near we could see their shadows.

"Everything is all right now. We've got rid of the stumbling block." It
was undoubtedly the voice of Clown.

"He only glories in bullying but has no tact." This from Red Shirt.

"He is like that young tough, isn't he? Why, as to that young tough, he
is a winsome, sporty Master Darling."

"I don't want my salary raised, he says, or I want to tender
resignation,--I'm sure something is wrong with his nerves."

I was greatly inclined to open the window, jump out of the second story
and make them see more stars than they cared to, but I restrained myself
with some effort. The two laughed, and passed below the gas light, and
into Kadoya.

"Say."

"Well."

"He's here."

"Yes, he has come at last."

"I feel quite easy now."

"Damned Clown called me a sporty Master Darling."

"The stumbling[R] block means me. Hell!"

I and Porcupine had to waylay them on their return. But we knew no more
than the man in the moon when they would come out. Porcupine went down
to the hotel office, notifying them to the probability of our going out
at midnight, and requesting them to leave the door unfastened so we
could get out anytime. As I think about it now, it is wonderful how the
hotel people complied with our request. In most cases, we would have
been taken for burglars.

It was trying to wait for the coming of Red Shirt, but it was still more
trying to wait for his coming out again. We could not go to sleep, nor
could we remain with our faces stuck to the shoji all the time our minds
constantly in a state of feverish agitation. In all my life, I never
passed such fretful, mortifying hours. I suggested that we had better go
right into his room and catch him but Porcupine rejected the proposal
outright. If we get in there at this time of night, we are likely to be
prevented from preceding much further, he said, and if we ask to see
him, they will either answer that he is not there or will take us into a
different room. Supposing we do break into a room, we cannot tell of all
those many rooms, where we can find him. There is no other way but to
wait for him to come out, however tiresome it may be. So we sat up till
five in the morning.

The moment we saw them emerging from Kadoya, I and Porcupine followed
them. It was some time before the first train started and they had to
walk up to town. Beyond the limit of the hot springs town, there is a
road for about one block running through the rice fields, both sides of
which are lined with cedar trees. Farther on are thatch-roofed farm
houses here and there, and then one comes upon a dyke leading straight
to the town through the fields. We can catch them anywhere outside the
town, but thinking it would be better to get them, if possible, on the
road lined with cedar trees where we may not be seen by others, we
followed them cautiously. Once out of the town limit, we darted on a
double-quick time, and caught up with them. Wondering what was coming
after them, they turned back, and we grabbed their shoulders. We cried,
"Wait!" Clown, greatly rattled, attempted to escape, but I stepped in
front of him to cut off his retreat.

"What makes one holding the job of a head teacher stay over night at
Kadoya!" Porcupine directly fired the opening gun.

"Is there any rule that a head teacher should not stay over night at
Kadoya?" Red Shirt met the attack in a polite manner. He looked a
little pale.

"Why the one who is so strict as to forbid others from going even to
noodle house or dango shop as unbecoming to instructors, stayed over
night at a hotel with a geisha!"

Clown was inclined to run at the first opportunity; so kept I
before him.

"What's that Master Darling of a young tough!" I roared.

"I didn't mean you. Sir. No, Sir, I didn't mean you, sure." He insisted
on this brazen excuse. I happened to notice at that moment that I had
held my pockets with both hands. The eggs in both pockets jerked so when
I ran, that I had been holding them, I thrust my hand into the pocket,
took out two and dashed them on the face of Clown. The eggs crushed, and
from the tip of his nose the yellow streamed down. Clown was taken
completely surprised, and uttering a hideous cry, he fell down on the
ground and begged for mercy. I had bought those eggs to eat, but had not
carried them for the purpose of making "Irish Confetti" of them.
Thoroughly roused, in the moment of passion, I had dashed them at him
before I knew what I was doing. But seeing Clown down and finding my
hand grenade successful, I banged the rest of the eggs on him,
intermingled with "Darn you, you sonovagun!" The face of Clown was
soaked in yellow.

While I was bombarding Clown with the eggs, Porcupine was firing at
Red[S] Shirt.

"Is there any evidence that I stayed there over night with a geisha?"

"I saw your favorite old chicken go there early in the evening, and am
telling you so. You can't fool me!"

"No need for us of fooling anybody. I stayed there with Mr. Yoshikawa,
and whether any geisha had gone there early in the evening or not,
that's none of my business."

"Shut up!" Porcupine wallopped him one. Red Shirt tottered.

"This is outrageous! It is rough to resort to force before deciding the
right or wrong of it!"

"Outrageous indeed!" Another clout. "Nothing but wallopping will be
effective on you scheming guys." The remark was followed by a shower
of blows. I soaked Clown at the same time, and made him think he saw
the way to the Kingdom-Come. Finally the two crawled and crouched at
the foot of a cedar tree, and either from inability to move or to
see, because their eyes had become hazy, they did not even attempt to
break away.

"Want more? If so, here goes some more!" With that we gave him more
until he cried enough. "Want more? You?" we turned to Clown, and he
answered "Enough, of course."

"This is the punishment of heaven on you grovelling wretches. Keep
this in your head and be more careful hereafter. You can never talk
down justice."

The two said nothing. They were so thoroughly cowed that they could
not speak.

"I'm going to neither, run away nor hide. You'll find me at Minato-ya on
the beach up to five this evening. Bring police officers or any old
thing you want," said Porcupine.

"I'm not going to run away or hide either. Will wait for you at the same
place with Hotta. Take the case to the police station if you like, or do
as you damn please," I said, and we two walked our own way.

It was a little before seven when I returned to my room. I started
packing as soon as I was in the room, and the astonished old lady asked
me what I was trying to do. I'm going to Tokyo to fetch my Madam, I
said, and paid my bill. I boarded a train and came to Minato-ya on the
beach and found Porcupine asleep upstairs. I thought of writing my
resignation, but not knowing how, just scribbled off that "because of
personal affairs, I have to resign and return, to Tokyo. Yours truly,"
and addressed and mailed it to the principal.

The steamer leaves the harbor at six in the evening. Porcupine and I,
tired out, slept like logs, and when we awoke it was two o'clock. We
asked the maid if the police had called on us, and she said no. Red
Shirt and Clown had not taken it to the police, eh? We laughed.

That night I and Porcupine left the town. The farther the vessel steamed
away from the shore, the more refreshed we felt. From Kobe to Tokyo we
boarded a through train and when we made Shimbashi, we breathed as if we
were once more in congenial human society. I parted from Porcupine at
the station, and have not had the chance of meeting him since.

I forgot to tell you about Kiyo. On my arrival at Tokyo, I rushed into
her house swinging my valise, before going to a hotel, with "Hello,
Kiyo, I'm back!"

"How good of you to return so soon!" she cried and hot tears streamed
down her cheeks. I was overjoyed, and declared that I would not go to
the country any more but would start housekeeping with Kiyo in Tokyo.

Some time afterward, some one helped me to a job as assistant engineer
at the tram car office. The salary was 25 yen a month, and the house
rent six. Although the house had not a magnificent front entrance, Kiyo
seemed quite satisfied, but, I am sorry to say, she was a victim of
pneumonia and died in February this year. On the day preceding her
death, she asked me to bedside, and said, "Please, Master Darling, if
Kiyo is dead, bury me in the temple yard of Master Darling. I will be
glad to wait in the grave for my Master Darling."

So Kiyo's grave is in the Yogen temple at Kobinata.

--(THE END)--

[A: Insitent]
[B: queershaped]
[C: The original just had the Japanese character, Unicode U+5927, sans
    description]
[D: aweinspiring]
[E: about about]
[F: atomosphere]
[G: Helloo]
[H: you go]
[I: goo-goo eyes]
[J: proper hyphenation unknown]
[K: pin-princking]
[L: Procupine]
[M: celabration]
[N: wans't]
[O: paper.]
[P: girl shead]
[Q: stumblieg]
[R: Rad]










End of Project Gutenberg's Botchan (Master Darling), by Kin-nosuke Natsume

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOTCHAN (MASTER DARLING) ***

***** This file should be named 8868.txt or 8868.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/8/6/8868/

Produced by David Starner and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
