line, while Clown jibed me "What? Caught one already? Very remarkable,
indeed!" I had drawn in nearly all the line, leaving only about five
feet in the water. I peeped over and saw a fish that looked like a gold
fish with stripes was coming up swimming to right and left. It was
interesting. On taking it out of the water, it wriggled and jumped, and
covered my face with water. After some effort, I had it and tried to
detach the hook, but it would not come out easily. My hands became
greasy and the sense was anything but pleasing. I was irritated; I swung
the line and banged the fish against the bottom of the boat. It speedily
died. Red Shirt and Clown watched me with surprise. I washed my hands in
the water but they still smelled "fishy." No more for me! I don't care
what fish I might get, I don't want to grab a fish. And I presume the
fish doesn't want to be grabbed either. I hastily rolled up the line.

"Splendid for the first honor, but that's goruki," Clown again made a
"fresh" remark.

"Goruki sounds like the name of a Russian literator," said Red Shirt.
"Yes, just like a Russian literator," Clown at once seconded Red Shirt.
Gorky for a Russian literator, Maruki a photographer of Shibaku, and
komeno-naruki (rice) a life-giver, eh? This Red Shirt has a bad hobby of
marshalling before anybody the name of foreigners. Everybody has his
specialty. How could a teacher of mathematics like me tell whether it is
a Gorky or shariki (rikishaman). Red Shirt should have been a little
more considerate. And if he wants to mention such names at all, let him
mention "Autobiography of Ben Franklin," or "Pushing to the Front," or
something we all know. Red Shirt has been seen once in a while bringing
a magazine with a red cover entitled Imperial Literature to the school
and poring over it with reverence. I heard it from Porcupine that Red
Shirt gets his supply of all foreign names from that magazine. Well, I
should say!

For some time, Red Shirt and Clown fished assiduously and within about
an hour they caught about fifteen fish. The funny part of it was that
all they caught were goruki; of sea-bream there was not a sign.

"This is a day of bumper crop of Russian literature," Red Shirt said,
and Clown answered:

"When one as skilled as you gets nothing but goruki, it's natural for me
to get nothing else."

The boatman told me that this small-sized fish goruki has too many
tiny bones and tastes too poor to be fit for eating, but they could be
used for fertilising. So Red Shirt and Clown were fishing fertilisers
with vim and vigor. As for me, one goruki was enough and I laid down
myself on the bottom, and looked up at the sky. This was far more
dandy than fishing.

Then the two began whispering. I could not hear well, nor did I care to.
I was looking up at the sky and thinking about Kiyo. If I had enough of
money, I thought, and came with Kiyo to such a picturesque place, how
joyous it would be. No matter how picturesque the scene might be, it
would be flat in the company of Clown or of his kind. Kiyo is a poor
wrinkled woman, but I am not ashamed to take her to any old place. Clown
or his likes, even in a Victoria or a yacht, or in a sky-high position,
would not be worthy to come within her shadow. If I were the head
teacher, and Red Shirt I, Clown would be sure to fawn on me and jeer at
Red Shirt. They say Yedo kids are flippant. Indeed, if a fellow like
Clown was to travel the country and repeatedly declare "I am a Yedo
kid," no wonder the country folk would decide that the flippant are Yedo
kids and Yedo kids are flippant. While I was meditating like this, I
heard suppressed laughter. Between their laughs they talked something,
but I could not make out what they were talking about. "Eh? I don't
know......" "...... That's true ...... he doesn't know ...... isn't it
pity, though ......." "Can that be......." "With grasshoppers ......
that's a fact."

I did not listen to what they were talking, but when I heard Clown say
"grasshoppers," I cocked my ear instinctively. Clown emphasized, for
what reason I do not know the word "grasshopers" so that it would be
sure to reach my ear plainly, and he blurred the rest on purpose. I did
not move, and kept on listening. "That same old Hotta," "that may be the
case...." "Tempura ...... ha, ha, ha ......" "...... incited ......"
"...... dango also? ......"

The words were thus choppy, but judging by their saying "grasshoppers,"
"tempura" or "dango," I was sure they were secretly talking something
about me. If they wanted to talk, they should do it louder. If they
wanted to discuss something secret, why in thunder did they invite me?
What damnable blokes! Grasshoppers or glass-stoppers, I was not in the
wrong; I have kept quiet to save the face of Badger because the
principle asked me to leave the matter to him. Clown has been making
unnecessary criticisms; out with your old paint-brushes there! Whatever
concerns me, I will settle it myself sooner or later, and they had just
to keep off my toes. But remarks such as "the same old Hotta" or "......
incited ......" worried me a bit. I could not make out whether they
meant that Hotta incited me to extend the circle of the trouble, or that
he incited the students to get at me. As I gazed at the blue sky, the
sunlight gradually waned and chilly winds commenced stirring. The clouds
that resembled the streaky smokes of joss sticks were slowly extending
over a clear sky, and by degrees they were absorbed, melted and changed
to a faint fog.

"Well, let's be going," said Red Shirt suddenly. "Yes, this is the time
we were going. See your Madonna to-night?" responded Clown. "Cut out
nonsense ...... might mean a serious trouble," said Red Shirt who was
reclining against the edge of the boat, now raising himself. "O, that's
all right if he hears.......," and when Clown, so saying, turned himself
my way, I glared squarely in his face. Clown turned back as if to keep
away from a dazzling light, and with "Ha, this is going some," shrugged
his shoulders and scratched his head.

The boat was now being rowed shore-ward over the calm sea. "You don't
seem much fond of fishing," asked Red Shirt. "No, I'd rather prefer
lying and looking at the sky," I answered, and threw the stub of
cigarette I had been smoking into the water; it sizzled and floated on
the waves parted by the oar.

"The students are all glad because you have come. So we want you do your
best." Red Shirt this time started something quite alien to fishing. "I
don't think they are," I said. "Yes; I don't mean it as flattery. They
are, sure. Isn't it so, Mr. Yoshikawa?"

"I should say they are. They're crazy over it," said Clown with an
unctuous smile. Strange that whatever Clown says, it makes me itching
mad. "But, if you don't look out, there is danger," warned Red Shirt.

"I am fully prepared for all dangers," I replied. In fact, I had made up
my mind either to get fired or to make all the students in the dormitory
apologize to me.

"If you talk that way, that cuts everything out. Really, as a head
teacher, I've been considering what is good for you, and wouldn't like
you to mistake it."

"The head teacher is really your friend. And I'm doing what I can for
you, though mighty little, because you and I are Yedo kids, and I would
like to have you stay with us as long as possible and we can help each
other." So said Clown and it sounded almost human. I would sooner hang
myself than to get helped by Clown.

"And the students are all glad because you had come, but there are many
circumstances," continued Red Shirt. "You may feel angry sometimes but
be patient for the present, and I will never do anything to hurt your
interests."

"You say 'many circumstances'; what are they?"

"They're rather complicated. Well, they'll be clear to you by and by.
You'll understand them naturally without my talking them over. What do
you say, Mr. Yoshikawa?"

"Yes, they're pretty complicated; hard to get them cleared up in a
jiffy. But they'll become clear by-the-bye. Will be understood naturally
without my explaining them," Clown echoed Red Shirt.

"If they're such a bother, I don't mind not hearing them. I only asked
you because you sprang the subject."

"That's right. I may seem irresponsible in not concluding the thing I
had started. Then this much I'll tell you. I mean no offense, but you
are fresh from school, and teaching is a new experience. And a school is
a place where somewhat complicated private circumstances are common and
one cannot do everything straight and simple".

"If can't get it through straight and simple, how does it go?"

"Well, there you are so straight as that. As I was saying, you're short
of experience........"

"I should be. As I wrote it down in my record-sheet, I'm 23 years and
four months."

"That's it. So you'd be done by some one in unexpected quarter."

"I'm not afraid who might do me as long as I'm honest."

"Certainly not. No need be afraid, but I do say you look sharp; your
predecessor was done."

I noticed Clown had become quiet, and turning round, saw him at the
stern talking with the boatman. Without Clown, I found our conversation
running smoothly.

"By whom was my predecessor done?"

"If I point out the name, it would reflect on the honor of that person,
so I can't mention it. Besides there is no evidence to prove it and I
may be in a bad fix if I say it. At any rate, since you're here, my
efforts will prove nothing if you fail. Keep a sharp look-out, please."

"You say look-out, but I can't be more watchful than I'm now. If I don't
do anything wrong, after all, that's all right isn't it?"

Red Shirt laughed. I did not remember having said anything provocative
of laughter. Up to this very minute, I have been firm in my conviction
that I'm right. When I come to consider the situation, it appears that a
majority of people are encouraging others to become bad. They seem to
believe that one must do wrong in order to succeed. If they happen to
see some one honest and pure, they sneer at him as "Master Darling" or
"kiddy." What's the use then of the instructors of ethics at grammar
schools or middle schools teaching children not to tell a lie or to be
honest. Better rather make a bold departure and teach at schools the
gentle art of lying or the trick of distrusting others, or show pupils
how to do others. That would be beneficial for the person thus taught
and for the public as well. When Red Shirt laughed, he laughed at my
simplicity. My word! what chances have the simple-hearted or the pure in
a society where they are made objects of contempt! Kiyo would never
laugh at such a time; she would listen with profound respect. Kiyo is
far superior to Red Shirt.

"Of course, that't all right as long as you don't do anything wrong. But
although you may not do anything wrong, they will do you just the same
unless you can see the wrong of others. There are fellows you have got
to watch,--the fellows who may appear off-hand, simple and so kind as to
get boarding house for you...... Getting rather cold. 'Tis already
autumn, isn't it. The beach looks beer-color in the fog. A fine view.
Say, Mr. Yoshikawa, what do you think of the scene along the
beach?......" This in a loud voice was addressed to Clown.

"Indeed, this is a fine view. I'd get a sketch of it if I had time.
Seems a pity to leave it there," answered Clown.

A light was seen upstairs at Minato-ya, and just as the whistle of a
train was sounded, our boat pushed its nose deep into the sand. "Well,
so you're back early," courtesied the wife of the boatman as she stepped
upon the sand. I stood on the edge of the boat; and whoop! I jumped out
to the beach.



CHAPTER VI.


I heartily despise Clown. It would be beneficial for Japan if such a
fellow were tied to a quernstone and dumped into the sea. As to Red
Shirt, his voice did not suit my fancy. I believe he suppresses his
natural tones to put on airs and assume genteel manner. He may put on
all kinds of airs, but nothing good will come of it with that type of
face. If anything falls in love with him, perhaps the Madonna will be
about the limit. As a head-teacher, however, he is more serious than
Clown. As he did not say definitely, I cannot get to the point, but it
appears that he warned me to look-out for Porcupine as he is crooked. If
that was the case, he should have declared it like a man. And if
Porcupine is so bad a teacher as that, it would be better to discharge
him. What a lack of backbone for a head teacher and a Bachelor of Arts!
As he is a fellow so cautious as to be unable to mention the name of the
other even in a whisper, he is surely a mollycoddle. All mollycoddles
are kind, and that Red Shirt may be as kind as a woman. His kindness is
one thing, and his voice quite another, and it would be wrong to
disregard his kindness on account of his voice. But then, isn't this
world a funny place! The fellow I don't like is kind to me, and the
friend whom I like is crooked,--how absurd! Probably everything here
goes in opposite directions as it is in the country, the contrary holds
in Tokyo. A dangerous place, this. By degrees, fires may get frozen and
custard pudding petrified. But it is hardly believable that Porcupine
would incite the students, although he might do most anything he wishes
as he is best liked among them. Instead of taking in so roundabout a
way, in the first place, it would have saved him a lot of trouble if he
came direct to me and got at me for a fight. If I am in his way, he had
better tell me so, and ask me to resign because I am in his way. There
is nothing that cannot be settled by talking it over. If what he says
sounds reasonable, I would resign even tomorrow. This is not the only
town where I can get bread and butter; I ought not to die homeless
wherever I go. I thought Porcupine was a better sport.

When I came here, Porcupine was the first to treat me to ice water. To
be treated by such a fellow, even if it is so trifling a thing as ice
water, affects my honor. I had only one glass then and had him pay only
one sen and a half. But one sen or half sen, I shall not die in peace if
I accept a favor from a swindler. I will pay it back tomorrow when I go
to the school. I borrowed three yen from Kiyo. That three yen is not
paid yet to-day, though it is five years since. Not that I could not
pay, but that I did not want to. Kiyo never looks to my pocket thinking
I shall pay it back by-the-bye. Not by any means. I myself do not expect
to fulfill cold obligation like a stranger by meditating on returning
it. The more I worry about paying it back, the more I may be doubting
the honest heart of Kiyo. It would be the same as traducing her pure
mind. I have not paid her back that three yen not because I regard her
lightly, but because I regard her as part of myself. Kiyo and Porcupine
cannot be compared, of course, but whether it be ice water or tea, the
fact that I accept another's favor without saying anything is an act of
good-will, taking the other on his par value, as a decent fellow.
Instead of chipping in my share, and settling each account, to receive
munificence with grateful mind is an acknowledgment which no amount of
money can purchase. I have neither title nor official position but I am
an independent fellow, and to have an independent fellow kowtow to you
in acknowledgment of the favor you extend him should be considered as
far more than a return acknowledgment with a million yen. I made
Porcupine blow one sen and a half, and gave him my gratitude which is
more costly than a million yen. He ought to have been thankful for that.
And then what an outrageous fellow to plan a cowardly action behind my
back! I will give him back that one sen and a half tomorrow, and all
will be square. Then I will land him one. When I thought thus far, I
felt sleepy and slept like a log. The next day, as I had something in my
mind, I went to the school earlier than usual and waited for Porcupine,
but he did not appear for a considerable time. "Confucius" was there, so
was Clown, and finally Red Shirt, but for Porcupine there was a piece of
chalk on his desk but the owner was not there. I had been thinking of
paying that one sen and a half as soon as I entered the room, and had
brought the coppers to the school grasped in my hand. My hands get
easily sweaty, and when I opened my hand, I found them wet. Thinking
that Porcupine might say something if wet coins were given him, I placed
them upon my desk, and cooled them by blowing in them. Then Red Shirt
came to me and said he was sorry to detain me yesterday, thought I have
been annoyed. I told him I was not annoyed at all, only I was hungry.
Thereupon Red Shirt put his elbows upon the desk, brought his
sauce-pan-like face close to my nose, and said; "Say, keep dark what I
told you yesterday in the boat. You haven't told it anybody, have you?"
He seems quite a nervous fellow as becoming one who talks in a feminish
voice. It was certain that I had not told it to anybody, but as I was in
the mood to tell it and had already one sen and a half in my hand, I
would be a little rattled if a gag was put on me. To the devil with Red
Shirt! Although he had not mentioned the name "Porcupine," he had given
me such pointers as to put me wise as to who the objective was, and now
he requested me not to blow the gaff!--it was an irresponsibility least
to be expected from a head teacher. In the ordinary run of things, he
should step into the thick of the fight between Porcupine and me, and
side with me with all his colors flying. By so doing, he might be worthy
the position of the head teacher, and vindicate the principle of wearing
red shirts.

I told the head teacher that I had not divulged the secret to anybody
but was going to fight it out with Porcupine. Red Shirt was greatly
perturbed, and stuttered out; "Say, don't do anything so rash as that. I
don't remember having stated anything plainly to you about Mr.
Hotta....... if you start a scrimmage here, I'll be greatly
embarrassed." And he asked the strangely outlandish question if I had
come to the school to start trouble? Of course not, I said, the school
would not stand for my making trouble and pay me salary for it. Red
Shirt then, perspiring, begged me to keep the secret as mere reference
and never mention it. "All right, then," I assured him, "this robs me
shy, but since you're so afraid of it, I'll keep it all to myself." "Are
you sure?" repeated Red Shirt. There was no limit to his womanishness.
If Red Shirt was typical of Bachelors of Arts, I did not see much in
them. He appeared composed after having requested me to do something
self-contradictory and wanting logic, and on top of that suspects my
sincerity.

"Don't you mistake," I said to myself, "I'm a man to the marrow, and
haven't the idea of breaking my own promises; mark that!"

Meanwhile the occupants of the desks on both my sides came to the room,
and Red Shirt hastily withdrew to his own desk. Red Shirt shows some air
even in his walk. In stepping about the room, he places down his shoes
so as to make no sound. For the first time I came to know that making no
sound in one's walk was something satisfactory to one's vanity. He was
not training himself for a burglar, I suppose. He should cut out such
nonsense before it gets worse. Then the bugle for the opening of classes
was heard. Porcupine did not appear after all. There was no other way
but to leave the coins upon the desk and attend the class.

When I returned to the room a little late after the first hour class,
all the teachers were there at their desks, and Porcupine too was
there. The moment Porcupine saw my face, he said that he was late on
my account, and I should pay him a fine. I took out that one sen and a
half, and saying it was the price of the ice water, shoved it on his
desk and told him to take it. "Don't josh me," he said, and began
laughing, but as I appeared unusually serious, he swept the coins back
to my desk, and flung back, "Quit fooling." So he really meant to
treat me, eh?

"No fooling; I mean it," I said. "I have no reason to accept your treat,
and that's why I pay you back. Why don't you take it?"

"If you're so worried about that one sen and a half, I will take it, but
why do you pay it at this time so suddenly?"

"This time or any time, I want to pay it back. I pay it back because I
don't like you treat me."

Porcupine coldly gazed at me and ejaculated "H'm." If I had not been
requested by Red Shirt, here was the chance to show up his cowardice and
make it hot for him. But since I had promised not to reveal the secret,
I could do nothing. What the deuce did he mean by "H'm" when I was red
with anger.

"I'll take the price of the ice water, but I want you leave your
boarding house."

"Take that coin; that's all there is to it. To leave or not,--that's my
pleasure."

"But that is not your pleasure. The boss of your boarding house came to
me yesterday and wanted me to tell you leave the house, and when I heard
his explanation, what he said was reasonable. And I dropped there on my
way here this morning to hear more details and make sure of everything."

What Porcupine was trying to get at was all dark to me.

"I don't care a snap what the boss was damn well pleased to tell you," I
cried. "What do you mean by deciding everything by yourself! If there is
any reason, tell me first. What's the matter with you, deciding what the
boss says is reasonable without hearing me."

"Then you shall hear," he said. "You're too tough and been regarded
a nuisance over there. Say, the wife of a boarding house is a wife,
not a maid, and you've been such a four-flusher as to make her wipe
your feet."

"When did I make her wipe my feet?" I asked.

"I don't know whether you did or did not, but anyway they're pretty sore
about you. He said he can make ten or fifteen yen easily if he sell a
roll of panel-picture."

"Damn the chap! Why did he take me for a boarder then!"

"I don't know why. They took you but they want you leave because they
got tired of you. So you'd better get out."

"Sure, I will. Who'd stay in such a house even if they beg me on their
knees. You're insolent to have induced me to go to such a false accuser
in the first place."

"Might be either I'm insolent or you're tough." Porcupine is no less
hot-tempered than I am, and spoke with equally loud voice. All the other
teachers in the room, surprised, wondering what has happened, looked in
our direction and craned their necks. I was not conscious of having done
anything to be ashamed of, so I stood up and looked around. Clown alone
was laughing amused. The moment he met my glaring stare as if to say
"You too want to fight?" he suddenly assumed a grave face and became
serious. He seemed to be a little cowed. Meanwhile the bugle was heard,
and Porcupine and I stopped the quarrel and went to the class rooms.

In the afternoon, a meeting of the teachers was going to be held to
discuss the question of punishment of those students in the dormitory
who offended me the other night. This meeting was a thing I had to
attend for the first time in my life, and I was totally ignorant about
it. Probably it was where the teachers gathered to blow about their own
opinions and the principal bring them to compromise somehow. To
compromise is a method used when no decision can be delivered as to the
right or wrong of either side. It seemed to me a waste of time to hold a
meeting over an affair in which the guilt of the other side was plain as
daylight. No matter who tried to twist it round, there was no ground for
doubting the facts. It would have been better if the principal had
decided at once on such a plain case; he is surely wanting in decision.
If all principals are like this, a principal is a synonym of a
"dilly-dally."

The meeting hall was a long, narrow room next to that of the principal,
and was used for dining room. About twenty chairs, with black leather
seat, were lined around a narrow table, and the whole scene looked like
a restaurant in Kanda. At one end of the table the principal took his
seat, and next to him Red Shirt. All the rest shifted for themselves,
but the gymnasium teacher is said always to take the seat farthest down
out of modesty. The situation was new to me, so I sat down between the
teachers of natural history and of Confucius. Across the table sat
Porcupine and Clown. Think how I might, the face of Clown was a
degrading type. That of Porcupine was far more charming, even if I was
now on bad terms with him. The panel picture which hung in the alcove of
the reception hall of Yogen temple where I went to the funeral of my
father, looked exactly like this Porcupine. A priest told me the picture
was the face of a strange creature called Idaten. To-day he was pretty
sore, and frequently stared at me with his fiery eyes rolling. "You
can't bulldoze me with that," I thought, and rolled my own in defiance
and stared back at him. My eyes are not well-shaped but their large size
is seldom beaten by others. Kiyo even once suggested that I should make
a fine actor because I had big eyes.

"All now here?" asked the principal, and the clerk named Kawamura
counted one, two, three and one was short. "Just one more," said the
clerk, and it ought to be; Hubbard Squash was not there. I don't know
what affinity there is between Hubbard Squash and me, but I can never
forget his face. When I come to the teachers' room, his face attracts me
first; while walking out in the street, his manners are recalled to my
mind. When I go to the hot springs, sometimes I meet him with a
pale-face in the bath, and if I hallooed to him, he would raise his
trembling head, making me feel sorry for him. In the school there is no
teacher so quiet as he. He seldom, if ever, laughs or talks. I knew the
word "gentleman" from books, and thought it was found only in the
dictionary, but not a thing alive. But since I met Hubbard Squash, I was
impressed for the first time that the word represented a real substance.

As he is a man so attached to me, I had noticed his absence as soon as I
entered the meeting hall. To tell the truth, I came to the hall with the
intention of sitting next to him. The principal said that the absentee
may appear shortly, and untied a package he had before him, taking out
some hectograph sheets and began reading them. Red Shirt began polishing
his amber pipe with a silk handkerchief. This was his hobby, which was
probably becoming to him. Others whispered with their neighbors. Still
others were writing nothings upon the table with the erasers at the end
of their pencils. Clown talked to Porcupine once in a while, but he was
not responsive. He only said "Umh" or "Ahm," and stared at me with
wrathful eyes. I stared back with equal ferocity.

Then the tardy Hubbard Squash apologetically entered, and politely
explained that he was unavoidably detained. "Well, then the meeting is
called to order," said Badger. On these sheets was printed, first the
question of the punishment of the offending students, second that of
superintending the students, and two or three other matters. Badger,
putting on airs as usual, as if he was an incarnation of education,
spoke to the following effect.

"Any misdeeds or faults among the teachers or the students in this
school are due to the lack of virtues in my person, and whenever
anything happens, I inwardly feel ashamed that a man like me could hold
his position. Unfortunately such an affair has taken place again, and I
have to apologize from my heart. But since it has happened, it cannot be
helped; we must settle it one way or other. The facts are as you already
know, and I ask you gentlemen to state frankly the best means by which
the affair may be settled."

When I heard the principal speak, I was impressed that indeed the
principal, or Badger, was saying something "grand." If the principal was
willing to assume all responsibilities, saying it was his fault or his
lack of virtues, it would have been better stop punishing the students
and get himself fired first. Then there will be no need of holding such
thing as a meeting. In the first place, just consider it by common
sense. I was doing my night duty right, and the students started
trouble. The wrong doer is neither the principal nor I. If Porcupine
incited them, then it would be enough to get rid of the students and
Porcupine. Where in thunder would be a peach of damfool who always
swipes other people's faults and says "these are mine?" It was a stunt
made possible only by Badger. Having made such an illogical statement,
he glanced at the teachers in a highly pleased manner. But no one opened
his mouth. The teacher of natural history was gazing at the crow which
had hopped on the roof of the nearby building. The teacher of Confucius
was folding and unfolding the hectograph sheet. Porcupine was still
staring at me. If a meeting was so nonsensical an affair as this, I
would have been better absent taking a nap at home.

I became irritated, and half raised myself, intending to make a
convincing speech, but just then Red Shirt began saying something and I
stopped. I saw him say something, having put away his pipe, and wiping
his face with a striped silk handkerchief. I'm sure he copped that
handkerchief from the Madonna; men should use white linen. He said:

"When I heard of the rough affairs in the dormitory, I was greatly
ashamed as the head teacher of my lack of discipline and influence. When
such an affair takes place there is underlying cause somewhere. Looking
at the affair itself, it may seem that the students were wrong, but in a
closer study of the facts, we may find the responsibility resting with
the School. Therefore, I'm afraid it might affect us badly in the future
if we administer too severe a punishment on the strength of what has
been shown on the surface. As they are youngsters, full of life and
vigor, they might half-consciously commit some youthful pranks, without
due regard as to their good or bad. As to the mode of punishment itself,
I have no right to suggest since it is a matter entirely in the hand of
the principal, but I should ask, considering these points, that some
leniency be shown toward the students."

Well, as Badger, so was Red Shirt. He declares the "Rough Necks" among
the students is not their fault but the fault of the teachers. A crazy
person beats other people because the beaten are wrong. Very grateful,
indeed. If the students were so full of life and vigor, shovel them out
into the campus and let them wrestle their heads off. Who would have
grasshoppers put into his bed unconsciously! If things go on like this,
they may stab some one asleep, and get freed as having done the deed
unconsciously.

Having figured it out in this wise, I thought I would state my own views
on the matter, but I wanted to give them an eloquent speech and fairly
take away their breath. I have an affection of the windpipe which clog
after two or three words when I am excited. Badger and Red Shirt are
below my standing in their personality, but they were skilled in
speech-making, and it would not do to have them see my awkwardness. I'll
make a rough note of composition first, I thought, and started mentally
making a sentence, when, to my surprise, Clown stood up suddenly. It was
unusual for Clown to state his opinion. He spoke in his flippant tone:

"Really the grasshopper incident and the whoop-la affair are peculiar
happenings which are enough to make us doubt our own future. We teachers
at this time must strive to clear the atmosphere of the school. And
what the principal and the head teacher have said just now are fit and
proper. I entirely agree with their opinions. I wish the punishment be
moderate."

In what Clown had said there were words but no meaning. It was a
juxtaposition of high-flown words making no sense. All that I understood
was the words, "I entirely agree with their opinions."

Clown's meaning was not clear to me, but as I was thoroughly angered, I
rose without completing my rough note.

"I am entirely opposed to......." I said, but the rest did not come at
once. ".......I don't like such a topsy-turvy settlement," I added and
the fellows began laughing. "The students are absolutely wrong from the
beginning. It would set a bad precedent if we don't make them apologize
....... What do we care if we kick them all out ....... darn the kids
trying to guy a new comer......." and I sat down. Then the teacher of
natural history who sat on my right whined a weak opinion, saying "The
students may be wrong, but if we punish them too severely, they may
start a reaction and would make it rather bad. I am for the moderate
side, as the head teacher suggested." The teacher of Confucius on my
left expressed his agreement with the moderate side, and so did the
teacher of history endorse the views of the head teacher. Dash those
weak-knees! Most of them belonged to the coterie of Red Shirt. It would
make a dandy school if such fellows run it. I had decided in my mind
that it must be either the students apologize to me or I resign, and if
the opinion of Red Shirt prevailed, I had determined to return home and
pack up. I had no ability of out-talking such fellows, or even if I had,
I was in no humor to keeping their company for long. Since I don't
expect to remain in the school, the devil may take care of the rest. If
I said anything, they would only laugh; so I shut my mouth tight.

Porcupine, who up to this time had been listening to the others, stood
up with some show of spirit. Ha, the fellow was going to endorse the
views of Red Shirt, eh? You and I got to fight it out anyway, I thought,
so do any way you darn please. Porcupine spoke in a thunderous voice:

"I entirely differ from the opinions of the head teacher and other
gentlemen. Because, viewed from whatever angle, this incident cannot be
other than an attempt by those fifty students in the dormitory to make
a fool of a new teacher. The head teacher seems to trace the cause of
the trouble to the personality of that teacher himself, but, begging
his pardon, I think he is mistaken. The night that new teacher was on
night duty was not long after his arrival, not more than twenty days
after he had come into contact with the students. During those short
twenty days, the students could have no reason to criticise his
knowledges or his person. If he was insulted for some cause which
deserved insult, there may be reasons in our considering the act of the
students, but if we show undue leniency toward the frivolous students
who would insult a new teacher without cause, it would affect the
dignity of this school. The spirit of education is not only in
imparting technical knowledges, but also in encouraging honest,
ennobling and samurai-like virtues, while eliminating the evil tendency
to vulgarity and roughness. If we are afraid of reaction or further
trouble, and satisfy ourselves with make-shifts, there is no telling
when we can ever get rid of this evil atmosphere[G]. We are here to
eradicate this very evil. If we mean to countenance it, we had better
not accepted our positions here. For these reasons, I believe it proper
to punish the students in the dormitory to the fullest extent and also
make them apologize to that teacher in the open."

All were quiet. Red Shirt again began polishing his pipe. I was greatly
elated. He spoke almost what I had wanted to. I'm such a simple-hearted
fellow that I forgot all about the bickerings with Porcupine, and looked
at him with a grateful face, but he appeared to take no notice of me.

After a while, Porcupine again stood up, and said. "I forgot to mention
just now, so I wish to add. The teacher on night duty that night seems
to have gone to the hot springs during his duty hours, and I think it a
blunder. It is a matter of serious misconduct to take the advantage of
being in sole charge of the school, to slip out to a hot springs. The
bad behavior of the students is one thing; this blunder is another, and
I wish the principal to call attention of the responsible person to
that matter."

A strange fellow! No sooner had he backed me up than he began talking me
down. I knew the other night watch went out during his duty hours, and
thought it was a custom, so I went as far out as to the hot springs
without considering the situation seriously. But when it was pointed out
like this, I realised that I had been wrong. Thereupon I rose again and
said; "I really went to the hot springs. It was wrong and I apologize."
Then all again laughed. Whatever I say, they laugh. What a lot of boobs!
See if you fellows can make a clean breast of your own fault like this!
You fellows laugh because you can't talk straight.

After that the principal said that since it appeared that there will be
no more opinions, he will consider the matter well and administer what
he may deem a proper punishment. I may here add the result of the
meeting. The students in the dormitory were given one week's
confinement, and in addition to that, apologized to me. If they had not
apologized, I intended to resign and go straight home, but as it was it
finally resulted in a bigger and still worse affair, of which more
later. The principal then at the meeting said something to the effect
that the manners of the students should be directed rightly by the
teachers' influence, and as the first step, no teacher should patronize,
if possible, the shops where edibles and drinks were served, excepting,
however, in case of farewell party or such social gatherings. He said he
would like no teacher to go singly to eating houses of lower kind--for
instance, noodle-house or dango shop.... And again all laughed. Clown
looked at Porcupine, said "tempura" and winked his eyes, but Porcupine
regarded him in silence. Good!

My "think box" is not of superior quality, so things said by Badger were
not clear to me, but I thought if a fellow can't hold the job of teacher
in a middle school because he patronizes a noodle-house or dango shop,
the fellow with bear-like appetite like me will never be able to hold
it. If it was the case, they ought to have specified when calling for a
teacher one who does not eat noodle and dango. To give an appointment
without reference to the matter at first, and then to proclaim that
noodle or dango should not be eaten was a blow to a fellow like me who
has no other petty hobby. Then Red Shirt again opened his mouth.

"Teachers of the middle school belong to the upper class of society and
they should not be looking after material pleasures only, for it would
eventually have effect upon their personal character. But we are human,
and it would be intolerable in a small town like this to live without
any means of affording some pleasure to ourselves, such as fishing,
reading literary products, composing new style poems, or haiku
(17-syllable poem). We should seek mental consolation of higher order."

There seemed no prospect that he would quit the hot air. If it was a
mental consolation to fish fertilisers on the sea, have goruki for
Russian literature, or to pose a favorite geisha beneath pine tree, it
would be quite as much a mental consolation to eat dempura noodle and
swallow dango. Instead of dwelling on such sham consolations, he would
find his time better spent by washing his red shirts. I became so
exasperated that I asked; "Is it also a mental consolation to meet the
Madonna?" No one laughed this time and looked at each other with queer
faces, and Red Shirt himself hung his head, apparently embarrassed. Look
at that! A good shot, eh? Only I was sorry for Hubbard Squash who,
having heard the remark, became still paler.



CHAPTER VII.


That very night I left the boarding house. While I was packing up, the
boss came to me and asked if there was anything wrong in the way I was
treated. He said he would be pleased to correct it and suit me if I was
sore at anything. This beats me, sure. How is it possible for so many
boneheads to be in this world! I could not tell whether they wanted me
to stay or get out. They're crazy. It would be disgrace for a Yedo kid
to fuss about with such a fellow; so I hired a rikishaman and speedily
left the house.

I got out of the house all right, but had no place to go. The rikishaman
asked me where I was going. I told him to follow me with his mouth shut,
then he shall see and I kept on walking. I thought of going to
Yamashiro-ya to avoid the trouble of hunting up a new boarding house,
but as I had no prospect of being able to stay there long, I would have
to renew the hunt sooner or later, so I gave up the idea. If I continued
walking this way, I thought I might strike a house with the sign of
"boarders taken" or something similar, and I would consider the first
house with the sign the one provided for me by Heaven. I kept on going
round and round through the quiet, decent part of the town when I found
myself at Kajimachi. This used to be former samurai quarters where one
had the least chance of finding any boarding house, and I was going to
retreat to a more lively part of the town when a good idea occurred to
me. Hubbard Squash whom I respected lived in this part of the town. He
is a native of the town, and has lived in the house inherited from his
great grandfather. He must be, I thought, well informed about nearly
everything in this town. If I call on him for his help, he will perhaps
find me a good boarding house. Fortunately, I called at his house once
before, and there was no trouble in finding it out. I knocked at the
door of a house, which I knew must be his, and a woman about fifty years
old with an old fashioned paper-lantern in hand, appeared at the door. I
do not despise young women, but when I see an aged woman, I feel much
more solicitous. This is probably because I am so fond of Kiyo. This
aged lady, who looked well-refined, was certainly mother of Hubbard
Squash whom she resembled. She invited me inside, but I asked her to
call him out for me. When he came I told him all the circumstances, and
asked him if he knew any who would take me for a boarder. Hubbard Squash
thought for a moment in a sympathetic mood, then said there was an old
couple called Hagino, living in the rear of the street, who had asked
him sometime ago to get some boarders for them as there are only two in
the house and they had some vacant rooms. Hubbard Squash was kind enough
to go along with me and find out if the rooms were vacant. They were.

From that night I boarded at the house of the Haginos. What surprised me
was that on the day after I left the house of Ikagin, Clown stepped in
and took the room I had been occupying. Well used to all sorts of tricks
and crooks as I might have been, this audacity fairly knocked me off my
feet. It was sickening.

I saw that I would be an easy mark for such people unless I brace up
and try to come up, or down, to their level. It would be a high time
indeed for me to be alive if it were settled that I would not get three
meals a day without living on the spoils of pick pockets. Nevertheless,
to hang myself,--healthy and vigorous as I am,--would be not only
inexcusable before my ancestors but a disgrace before the public. Now I
think it over, it would have been better for me to have started
something like a milk delivery route with that six hundred yen as
capital, instead of learning such a useless stunt as mathematics at the
School of Physics. If I had done so, Kiyo could have stayed with me,
and I could have lived without worrying about her so far a distance
away. While I was with her I did not notice it, but separated thus I
appreciated Kiyo as a good-natured old woman. One could not find a
noble natured woman like Kiyo everywhere. She was suffering from a
slight cold when I left Tokyo and I wondered how she was getting on
now? Kiyo must have been pleased when she received the letter from me
the other day. By the way, I thought it was the time I was in receipt
of answer from her. I spent two or three days with things like this in
my mind. I was anxious about the answer, and asked the old lady of the
house if any letter came from Tokyo for me, and each time she would
appear sympathetic and say no. The couple here, being formerly of
samurai class, unlike the Ikagin couple, were both refined. The old
man's recital of "utai" in a queer voice at night was somewhat telling
on my nerves, but it was much easier on me as he did not frequent my
room like Ikagin with the remark of "let me serve you tea."

The old lady once in a while would come to my room and chat on many
things. She questioned me why I had not brought my wife with me. I asked
her if I looked like one married, reminding her that I was only twenty
four yet. Saying "it is proper for one to get married at twenty four" as
a beginning, she recited that Mr. Blank married when he was twenty, that
Mr. So-and-So has already two children at twenty two, and marshalled
altogether about half a dozen examples,--quite a damper on my youthful
theory. I will then get marred at twenty four, I said, and requested her
to find me a good wife, and she asked me if I really meant it.

"Really? You bet! I can't help wanting to get married."

"I should suppose so. Everybody is just like that when young." This
remark was a knocker; I could not say anything to that.

"But I'm sure you have a Madam already. I have seen to that with my
own eyes."

"Well, they are sharp eyes. How have you seen it?"

"How? Aren't you often worried to death, asking if there's no letter
from Tokyo?"

"By Jupiter! This beats me!"

"Hit the mark, haven't I?"

"Well, you probably have."

"But the girls of these days are different from what they used to be and
you need a sharp look-out on them. So you'd better be careful."

"Do you mean that my Madam in Tokyo is behaving badly?"

"No, your Madam is all right."

"That makes me feel safe. Then about what shall I be careful?"

"Yours is all right. Though yours is all right......."

"Where is one not all right?"

"Rather many right in this town. You know the daughter of the Toyamas?

"No, I do not."

"You don't know her yet? She is the most beautiful girl about here. She
is so beautiful that the teachers in the school call her Madonna. You
haven't heard that?

"Ah, the Madonna! I thought it was the name of a geisha."

"No, Sir. Madonna is a foreign word and means a beautiful girl,
doesn't it?"

"That may be. I'm surprised."

"Probably the name was given by the teacher of drawing."

"Was it the work of Clown?"

"No, it was given by Professor Yoshikawa."

"Is that Madonna not all right?"

"That Madonna-san is a Madonna not all right."

"What a bore! We haven't any decent woman among those with nicknames
from old days. I should suppose the Madonna is not all right."

"Exactly. We have had awful women such as O-Matsu the Devil or Ohyaku
the Dakki.

"Does the Madonna belong to that ring?"

"That Madonna-san, you know, was engaged to Professor Koga,--who brought
you here,--yes, was promised to him."

"Ha, how strange! I never knew our friend Hubbard Squash was a fellow of
such gallantry. We can't judge a man by his appearance. I'll be a bit
more careful."

"The father of Professor Koga died last year,--up to that time they had
money and shares in a bank and were well off,--but since then things
have grown worse, I don't know why. Professor Koga was too good-natured,
in short, and was cheated, I presume. The wedding was delayed by one
thing or another and there appeared the head teacher who fell in love
with the Madonna head over heels and wanted to many her."

"Red Shirt? He ought be hanged. I thought that shirt was not an ordinary
kind of shirt. Well?"

"The head-teacher proposed marriage through a go-between, but the
Toyamas could not give a definite answer at once on account of their
relations with the Kogas. They replied that they would consider the
matter or something like that. Then Red Shirt-san worked up some ways
and started visiting the Toyamas and has finally won the heart of the
Miss. Red Shirt-san is bad, but so is Miss Toyama; they all talk bad of
them. She had agreed to be married to Professor Koga and changed her
mind because a Bachelor of Arts began courting her,--why, that would be
an offense to the God of To-day."

"Of course. Not only of To-day but also of tomorrow and the day after;
in fact, of time without end."

"So Hotta-san a friend of Koga-san, felt sorry for him and went to the
head teacher to remonstrate with him. But Red Shirt-san said that he had
no intention of taking away anybody who is promised to another. He may
get married if the engagement is broken, he said, but at present he was
only being acquainted with the Toyamas and he saw nothing wrong in his
visiting the Toyamas. Hotta-san couldn't do anything and returned. Since
then they say Red Shirt-san and Hotta-san are on bad terms."

"You do know many things, I should say. How did you get such details?
I'm much impressed."

"The town is so small that I can know everything."

Yes, everything seems to be known more than one cares. Judging by her
way, this woman probably knows about my tempura and dango affairs. Here
was a pot that would make peas rattle! The meaning of the Madonna, the
relations between Porcupine and Red Shirt became clear and helped me a
deal. Only what puzzled me was the uncertainty as to which of the two
was wrong. A fellow simple-hearted like me could not tell which side he
should help unless the matter was presented in black and white.

"Of Red Shirt and Porcupine, which is a better fellow?"

"What is Porcupine, Sir?"

"Porcupine means Hotta."

"Well, Hotta-san is physically strong, as strength goes, but Red
Shirt-san is a Bachelor of Arts and has more ability. And Red Shirt-san
is more gentle, as gentleness goes, but Hotta-san is more popular among
the students."

"After all, which is better?"

"After all, the one who gets a bigger salary is greater, I suppose?"

There was no use of going on further in this way, and I closed the talk.

Two or three days after this, when I returned from the school, the old
lady with a beaming smile, brought me a letter, saying, "Here you are
Sir, at last. Take your time and enjoy it." I took it up and found it
was from Kiyo. On the letter were two or three retransmission slips, and
by these I saw the letter was sent from Yamashiro-ya to the Iagins, then
to the Haginos. Besides, it stayed at Yamashiro-ya for about one week;
even letters seemed to stop in a hotel. I opened it, and it was a very
long letter.

"When I received the letter from my Master Darling, I intended to write
an answer at once. But I caught cold and was sick abed for about one
week and the answer was delayed for which I beg your pardon. I am not
well-used to writing or reading like girls in these days, and it
required some efforts to get done even so poorly written a letter as
this. I was going to ask my nephew to write it for me, but thought it
inexcusable to my Master Darling when I should take special pains for
myself. So I made a rough copy once, and then a clean copy. I finished
the clean copy, in two days, but the rough copy took me four days. It
may be difficult for you to read, but as I have written this letter with
all my might, please read it to the end."

This was the introductory part of the letter in which, about four feet
long, were written a hundred and one things. Well, it was difficult to
read. Not only was it poorly written but it was a sort of juxtaposition
of simple syllables that racked one's brain to make it clear where it
stopped or where it began. I am quick-tempered and would refuse to read
such a long, unintelligible letter for five yen, but I read this
seriously from the first to the last. It is a fact that I read it
through. My efforts were mostly spent in untangling letters and
sentences; so I started reading it over again. The room had become a
little dark, and this rendered it harder to read it; so finally I
stepped out to the porch where I sat down and went over it carefully.
The early autumn breeze wafted through the leaves of the banana trees,
bathed me with cool evening air, rustled the letter I was holding and
would have blown it clear to the hedge if I let it go. I did not mind
anything like this, but kept on reading.

"Master Darling is simple and straight like a split bamboo by
disposition," it says, "only too explosive. That's what worries me. If
you brand other people with nicknames you will only make enemies of
them; so don't use them carelessly; if you coin new ones, just tell them
only to Kiyo in your letters. The countryfolk are said to be bad, and I
wish you to be careful not have them do you. The weather must be worse
than in Tokyo, and you should take care not to catch cold. Your letter
is too short that I can't tell how things are going on with you. Next
time write me a letter at least half the length of this one. Tipping the
hotel with five yen is all right, but were you not short of money
afterward? Money is the only thing one can depend upon when in the
country and you should economize and be prepared for rainy days. I'm
sending you ten yen by postal money order. I have that fifty yen my
Master Darling gave me deposited in the Postal Savings to help you start
housekeeping when you return to Tokyo, and taking out this ten, I have
still forty yen left,--quite safe."

I should say women are very particular on many things.

When I was meditating with the letter flapping in my hand on the porch,
the old lady opened the sliding partition and brought in my supper.

"Still poring over the letter? Must be a very long one, I
imagine," she said.

"Yes, this is an important letter, so I'm reading it with the wind
blowing it about," I replied--the reply which was nonsense even for
myself,--and I sat down for supper. I looked in the dish on the tray,
and saw the same old sweet potatoes again to-night. This new boarding
house was more polite and considerate and refined than the Ikagins, but
the grub was too poor stuff and that was one drawback. It was sweet
potato yesterday, so it was the day before yesterday, and here it is
again to-night. True, I declared myself very fond of sweet potatoes, but
if I am fed with sweet potatoes with such insistency, I may soon have to
quit this dear old world. I can't be laughing at Hubbard Squash; I shall
become Sweet Potato myself before long. If it were Kiyo she would surely
serve me with my favorite sliced tunny or fried kamaboko, but nothing
doing with a tight, poor samurai. It seems best that I live with Kiyo.
If I have to stay long in the school, I believe I would call her from
Tokyo. Don't eat tempura, don't eat dango, and then get turned yellow by
feeding on sweet potatoes only, in the boarding house. That's for an
educator, and his place is really a hard one. I think even the priests
of the Zen sect are enjoying better feed. I cleaned up the sweet
potatoes, then took out two raw eggs from the drawer of my desk, broke
them on the edge of the rice bowl, to tide it over. I have to get
nourishment by eating raw eggs or something, or how can I stand the
teaching of twenty one hours a week?

I was late for my bath to-day on account of the letter from Kiyo. But I
would not like to drop off a single day since I had been there everyday.
I thought I would take a train to-day, and coming to the station with
the same old red towel dangling out of my hand, I found the train had
just left two or three minutes ago, and had to wait for some time. While
I was smoking a cigarette on a bench, my friend Hubbard Squash happened
to come in. Since I heard the story about him from the old lady my
sympathy for him had become far greater than ever. His reserve always
appeared to me pathetic. It was no longer a case of merely pathetic;
more than that. I was wishing to get his salary doubled, if possible,
and have him marry Miss Toyama and send them to Tokyo for about one
month on a pleasure trip. Seeing him, therefore, I motioned him to a
seat beside me, addressing him cheerfully:

"Hello[H], going to bath? Come and sit down here."

Hubbard Squash, appearing much awe-struck, said; "Don't mind me,
Sir," and whether out of polite reluctance or I don't know what,
remained standing.

"You have to wait for a little while before the next train starts; sit
down; you'll be tired," I persuaded him again. In fact, I was so
sympathetic for him that I wished to have him sit down by me somehow.
Then with a "Thank you, Sir," he at last sat down. A fellow like Clown,
always fresh, butts in where he is not wanted; or like Porcupine
swaggers about with a face which says "Japan would be hard up without
me," or like Red Shirt, self-satisfied in the belief of being the
wholesaler of gallantry and of cosmetics. Or like Badger who appears to
say; "If 'Education' were alive and put on a frockcoat, it would look
like me." One and all in one way or other have bravado, but I have
never seen any one like this Hubbard Squash, so quiet and resigned,
like a doll taken for a ransom. His face is rather swollen but for the
Madonna to cast off such a splendid fellow and give preference to Red
Shirt, was frivolous beyond my understanding. Put how many dozens of
Red Shirt you like together, it will not make one husband of stuff to
beat Hubbard Squash.

"Is anything wrong with you? You look quite fatigued," I asked.

"No, I have no particular ailments......."

"That's good. Poor health is the worst thing one can get."

"You appear very strong."

"Yes, I'm thin, but never got sick. That's something I don't like."

Hubbard Squash smiled at my words. Just then I heard some young girlish
laughs at the entrance, and incidentally looking that way, I saw a
"peach." A beautiful girl, tall, white-skinned, with her head done up
in "high-collared" style, was standing with a woman of about forty-five
or six, in front of the ticket window. I am not a fellow given to
describing a belle, but there was no need to repeat asserting that she
was beautiful. I felt as if I had warmed a crystal ball with perfume
and held it in my hand. The older woman was shorter, but as she
resembled the younger, they might be mother and daughter. The moment I
saw them, I forgot all about Hubbard Squash, and was intently gazing at
the young beauty. Then I was a bit startled to see Hubbard Squash
suddenly get up and start walking slowly toward them. I wondered if she
was not the Madonna. The three were courtesying in front of the ticket
window, some distance away from me, and I could not hear what they were
talking about.

The clock at the station showed the next train to start in five
minutes. Having lost my partner, I became impatient and longed for the
train to start as soon as possible, when a fellow rushed into the
station excited. It was Red Shirt. He had on some fluffy clothes,
loosely tied round with a silk-crepe girdle, and wound to it the same
old gold chain. That gold chain is stuffed. Red Shirt thinks nobody
knows it and is making a big show of it, but I have been wise. Red
Shirt stopped short, stared around, and then after bowing politely to
the three still in front of the ticket window, made a remark or two,
and hastily turned toward me. He came up to me, walking in his usual
cat's style, and hallooed.

"You too going to bath? I was afraid of missing the train and
hurried up, but we have three or four minutes yet. Wonder if that
clock is right?"

He took out his gold watch, and remarking it wrong about two minutes sat
down beside me. He never turned toward the belle, but with his chin on
the top of a cane, steadily looked straight before him. The older woman
would occasionally glance toward Red Shirt, but the younger kept her
profile away. Surely she was the Madonna.

The train now arrived with a shrill whistle and the passengers hastened
to board. Red Shirt jumped into the first class coach ahead of all. One
cannot brag much about boarding the first class coach here. It cost only
five sen for the first and three sen for the second to Sumida; even I
paid for the first and a white ticket. The country fellows, however,
being all close, seemed to regard the expenditure of the extra two sen a
serious matter and mostly boarded the second class. Following Red Shirt,
the Madonna and her mother entered the first class. Hubbard Squash
regularly rides in the second class. He stood at the door of a second
class coach and appeared somewhat hesitating, but seeing me coming, took
decisive steps and jumped into the second. I felt sorry for him--I do
not know why--and followed him into the same coach. Nothing wrong in
riding on the second with a ticket for the first, I believe.

At the hot springs, going down from the third floor to the bath room in
bathing gown, again I met Hubbard Squash. I feel my throat clogged up
and unable to speak at a formal gathering, but otherwise I am rather
talkative; so I opened conversation with him. He was so pathetic and my
compassion was aroused to such an extent that I considered it the duty
of a Yedo kid to console him to the best of my ability. But Hubbard
Squash was not responsive. Whatever I said, he would only answer "eh?"
or "umh," and even these with evident effort. Finally I gave up my
sympathetic attempt and cut off the conversation.

I did not meet Red Shirt at the bath. There are many bath rooms, and one
does not necessarily meet the fellows at the same bath room though he
might come on the same train. I thought it nothing strange. When I got
out of the bath, I found the night bright with the moon. On both sides
of the street stood willow trees which cast their shadows on the road. I
would take a little stroll, I thought. Coming up toward north, to the
end of the town, one sees a large gate to the left. Opposite the gate
stands a temple and both sides of the approach to the temple are lined
with houses with red curtains. A tenderloin inside a temple gate is an
unheard-of phenomenon. I wanted to go in and have a look at the place,
but for fear I might get another kick from Badger, I passed it by. A
flat house with narrow lattice windows and black curtain at the
entrance, near the gate, is the place where I ate dango and committed
the blunder. A round lantern with the signs of sweet meats hung outside
and its light fell on the trunk of a willow tree close by. I hungered to
have a bite of dango, but went away forbearing.

To be unable to eat dango one is so fond of eating, is tragic. But to
have one's betrothed change her love to another, would be more tragic.
When I think of Hubbard Squash, I believe that I should, not complain if
I cannot eat dango or anything else for three days. Really there is
nothing so unreliable a creature as man. As far as her face goes, she
appears the least likely to commit so stony-hearted an act as this. But
the beautiful person is cold-blooded and Koga-san who is swollen like a
pumpkin soaked in water, is a gentleman to the core,--that's where we
have to be on the look-out. Porcupine whom I had thought candid was said
to have incited the students and he whom then I regarded an agitator,
demanded of the principal a summary punishment of the students. The
disgustingly snobbish Red Shirt is unexpectedly considerate and warns me
in ways more than one, but then he won the Madonna by crooked means. He
denies, however, having schemed anything crooked about the Madonna, and
says he does not care to marry her unless her engagement with Koga is
broken. When Ikagin beat me out of his house, Clown enters and takes my
room. Viewed from any angle, man is unreliable. If I write these things
to Kiyo, it would surprise her. She would perhaps say that because it is
the west side of Hakone that the town had all the freaks and crooks
dumped in together.[7]

[Footnote 7: An old saying goes that east of the Hakone pass, there are
no apparitions or freaks.]

I do not by nature worry about little things, and had come so far
without minding anything. But hardly a month had passed since I came
here, and I have begun to regard the world quite uneasily. I have not
met with any particularly serious affairs, but I feel as if I had grown
five or six years older. Better say "good by" to this old spot soon and
return to Tokyo, I thought. While strolling thus thinking on various
matters, I had passed the stone bridge and come up to the levy of the
Nozeri river. The word river sounds too big; it is a shallow stream of
about six feet wide. If one goes on along the levy for about twelve
blocks, he reaches the Aioi village where there is a temple of Kwanon.

Looking back at the town of the hot springs, I see red lights gleaming
amid the pale moon beams. Where the sound of the drum is heard must be
the tenderloin. The stream is shallow but fast, whispering incessantly.
When I had covered about three blocks walking leisurely upon the bank,
I perceived a shadow ahead. Through the light of the moon, I found
there were two shadows. They were probably village youngsters returning
from the hot springs, though they did not sing, and were exceptionally
quiet for that.

I kept on walking, and I was faster than they. The two shadows became
larger. One appeared like a woman. When I neared them within about sixty
feet, the man, on hearing my footsteps, turned back. The moon was
shining from behind me. I could see the manner of the man then and
something queer struck me. They resumed their walk as before. And I
chased them on a full speed. The other party, unconscious, walked
slowly. I could now hear their voice distinctly. The levy was about six
feet wide, and would allow only three abreast. I easily passed them, and
turning back gazed squarely into the face of the man. The moon
generously bathed my face with its beaming light. The fellow uttered a
low "ah," and suddenly turning sideway, said to the woman "Let's go
back." They traced their way back toward the hot springs town.

Was it the intention of Red Shirt to hush the matter up by pretending
ignorance, or was it lack of nerve? I was not the only fellow who
suffered the consequence of living in a small narrow town.



CHAPTER VIII.


On my way back from the fishing to which I was invited by Red Shirt, and
since then, I began to suspect Porcupine. When the latter wanted me to
get out of Ikagin's house on sham pretexts, I regarded him a decidedly
unpleasant fellow. But as Porcupine, at the teachers' meeting, contrary
to my expectation, stood firmly for punishing the students to the
fullest extent of the school regulations, I thought it queer. When I
heard from the old lady about Porcupine volunteering himself for the
sake of Hubbard Squash to stop Red Shirt meddling with the Madonna, I
clapped my hands and hoorayed for him. Judging by these facts, I began
to wonder if the wrong-doer might be not Porcupine, but Red Shirt the
crooked one. He instilled into my head some flimsy hearsay plausibly and
in a roundabout-way. At this juncture I saw Red Shirt taking a walk with
the Madonna on the levy of the Nozeri river, and I decided that Red
Shirt may be a scoundrel. I am not sure of his being really scoundrel at
heart, but at any rate he is not a good fellow. He is a fellow with a
double face. A man deserves no confidence unless he is as straight as
the bamboo. One may fight a straight fellow, and feel satisfied. We
cannot lose sight of the fact that Red Shirt or his kind who is kind,
gentle, refined, and takes pride in his pipe had to be looked sharp, for
I could not be too careful in getting into a scrap with the fellow of
this type. I may fight, but I would not get square games like the
wrestling matches it the Wrestling Amphitheatre in Tokyo. Come to think
of it, Porcupine who turned against me and startled the whole teachers'
room over the amount of one sen and a half is far more like a man. When
he stared at me with owlish eyes at the teachers' meeting, I branded him
as a spiteful guy, but as I consider the matter now, he is better than
the feline voice of Red Shirt. To tell the truth, I tried to get
reconciled with Porcupine, and after the meeting, spoke a word or two to
him, but he shut up like a clam and kept glaring at me. So I became
sore, and let it go at that.

Porcupine has not spoken to me since. The one sen and a half which I
paid him back upon the desk, is still there, well covered with dust. I
could not touch it, nor would Porcupine take it. This one sen and a
half has become a barrier between us two. We two were cursed with this
one sen and a half. Later indeed I got sick of its sight that I hated
to see it.

While Porcupine and I were thus estranged, Red Shirt and I continued
friendly relations and associated together. On the day following my
accidental meeting with him near the Nozeri river, for instance, Red
Shirt came to my desk as soon as he came to the school, and asked me how
I liked the new boarding house. He said we would go together for fishing
Russian literature again, and talked on many things. I felt a bit
piqued, and said, "I saw you twice last night," and he answered, "Yes,
at the station. Do you go there at that time every day? Isn't it late?"
I startled him with the remark; "I met you on the levy of the Nozeri
river too, didn't I?" and he replied, "No, I didn't go in that
direction. I returned right after my bath."

What is the use of trying to keep it dark. Didn't we meet actually face
to face? He tells too many lies. If one can hold the job of a head
teacher and act in this fashion, I should be able to run the position of
Chancellor of a university. From this time on, my confidence in Red
Shirt became still less. I talk with Red Shirt whom I do not trust, and
I keep silent with Porcupine whom I respect. Funny things do happen in
this world.

One day Red Shirt asked me to come over to his house as he had something
to tell me, and much as I missed the trip to the hot springs, I started
for his house at about 4 o'clock. Red Shirt is single, but in keeping
with the dignity of a head teacher, he gave up the boarding house life
long ago, and lives in a fine house. The house rent, I understood, was
nine yen and fifty sen. The front entrance was so attractive that I
thought if one can live in such a splendid house at nine yen and a half
in the country, it would be a good game to call Kiyo from Tokyo and make
her heart glad. The younger brother of Red Shirt answered my bell. This
brother gets his lessons on algebra and mathematics from me at the
school. He stands no show in his school work, and being a "migratory
bird" is more wicked than the native boys.

I met Red Shirt. Smoking the same old unsavory amber pipe, he said
something to the following effect:

"Since you've been with us, our work has been more satisfactory than it
was under your predecessor, and the principal is very glad to have got
the right person in the right place. I wish you to work as hard as you
can, for the school is depending upon you."

"Well, is that so. I don't think I can work any harder than now......."

"What you're doing now is enough. Only don't forget what I told you the
other day."

"Meaning that one who helps me find a boarding house is dangerous?"

"If you state it so baldly, there is no meaning to it....... But that's
all right,...... I believe you understand the spirit of my advice. And
if you keep on in the way you're going to-day ...... We have not been
blind ...... we might offer you a better treatment later on if we can
manage it."

"In salary? I don't care about the salary, though the more the better."

"And fortunately there is going to be one teacher transferred,......
however, I can't guarantee, of course, until I talk it over with the
principal ...... and we might give you something out of his salary."

"Thank you. Who is going to be transferred?"

"I think I may tell you now; 'tis going to be Announced soon. Koga
is the man."

"But isn't Koga-san a native of this town?"

"Yes, he is. But there are some circumstances ...... and it is partly by
his own preference."

"Where is he going?"

"To Nobeoka in Hiuga province. As the place is so far away, he is going
there with his salary raised a grade higher."

"Is some one coming to take his place?"

"His successor is almost decided upon."

"Well, that's fine, though I'm not very anxious to have my salary
raised."

"I'm going to talk to the principal about that anyway. And, we may have
to ask you to work more some time later ...... and the principal appears
to be of the same opinion....... I want you to go[I] ahead with that in
your mind."

"Going to increase my working hours?"

"No. The working hours may be reduced......"

"The working hours shortened and yet work more? Sounds funny."

"It does sound funny ...... I can't say definitely just yet ...... it
means that we way have to ask you to assume more responsibility."

I could not make out what he meant. To assume more responsibility might
mean my appointment to the senior instructor of mathematics, but
Porcupine is the senior instructor and there is no danger of his
resigning. Besides, he is so very popular among the students that his
transfer or discharge would be inadvisable. Red Shirt always misses the
point. And though he did not get to the point, the object of my visit
was ended. We talked a while on sundry matters, Red Shirt proposing a
farewell dinner party for Hubbard Squash, asking me if I drink liquor
and praising Hubbard Squash as an amiable gentleman, etc. Finally he
changed the topic and asked me if I take an interest in "haiku"[8] Here
is where I beat it, I thought, and, saying "No, I don't, good by,"
hastily left the house. The "haiku" should be a diversion of Baseo[9] or
the boss of a barbershop. It would not do for the teacher of mathematics
to rave over the old wooden bucket and the morning glory.[10]

[Footnote 8: The 17-syllable poem]

[Footnote 9: A famous composer of the poem.]

[Footnote 10: There is a well-known 17-syllable poem describing the
scene of morning glories entwining around the wooden bucket.]

I returned home and thought it over. Here is a man whose mental process
defies a layman's understanding. He is going to court hardships in a
strange part of the country in preference of his home and the school
where he is working,--both of which should satisfy most
anybody,--because he is tired of them. That may be all right if the
strange place happens to be a lively metropolis where electric cars
run,--but of all places, why Nobeoka in Hiuga province? This town here
has a good steamship connection, yet I became sick of it and longed for
home before one month had passed. Nobeoka is situated in the heart of a
most mountainous country. According to Red Shirt, one has to make an
all-day ride in a wagonette to Miyazaki, after he had left the vessel,
and from Miyazaki another all-day ride in a rikisha to Nobeoka. Its name
alone does not commend itself as civilized. It sounds like a town
inhabited by men and monkeys in equal numbers. However sage-like Hubbard
Squash might be I thought he would not become a friend of monkeys of his
own choice. What a curious slant!

Just then the old lady brought in my supper--"Sweet potatoes again?" I
asked, and she said, "No, Sir, it is tofu to-night." They are about the
same thing.

"Say, I understand Koga-san is going to Nobeoka."

"Isn't it too bad?"

"Too bad? But it can't be helped if he goes there by his own
preference."

"Going there by his own preference? Who, Sir?"

"Who? Why, he! Isn't Professor Koga going there by his own choice?"

"That's wrong Mr. Wright, Sir."

"Ha, Mr. Wright, is it? But Red Shirt told me so just now. If that's
wrong Mr. Wright, then Red Shirt is blustering Mr. Bluff."

"What the head-teacher says is believable, but so Koga-san does not
wish to go."

"Our old lady is impartial, and that is good. Well, what's the matter?"

"The mother of Koga-san was here this morning, and told me all the
circumstances."

"Told you what circumstances?"

"Since the father of Koga-san died, they have not been quite well off as
we might have supposed, and the mother asked the principal if his salary
could not be raised a little as Koga-san has been in service for four
years. See?"

"Well?"

"The principal said that he would consider the matter, and she felt
satisfied and expected the announcement of the increase before long. She
hoped for its coming this month or next. Then the principal called
Koga-san to his office one day and said that he was sorry but the school
was short of money and could not raise his salary. But he said there is
an opening in Nobeoka which would give him five yen extra a month and he
thought that would suit his purpose, and the principal had made all
arrangements and told Koga-san he had better go......."

"That wasn't a friendly talk but a command. Wasn't it?"

"Yes, Sir, Koga-san told the principal that he liked to stay here better
at the old salary than go elsewhere on an increased salary, because he
has his own house and is living with his mother. But the matter has all
been settled, and his successor already appointed and it couldn't be
helped, said the principal."

"Hum, that's a jolly good trick, I should say. Then Koga-san has no
liking to go there? No wonder I thought it strange. We would have to go
a long way to find any blockhead to do a job in such a mountain village
and get acquainted with monkeys for five yen extra."

"What is a blockhead, Sir?"

"Well, let go at that. It was all the scheme of Red Shirt. Deucedly
underhand scheme, I declare. It was a stab from behind. And he means to
raise my salary by that; that's not right. I wouldn't take that raise.
Let's see if he can raise it."

"Is your salary going to be raised, Sir?"

"Yes, they said they would raise mine, but I'm thinking of refusing it."

"Why do you refuse?"

"Why or no why, it's going to be refused. Say, Red Shirt is a fool; he
is a coward."

"He may be a coward, but if he raises your salary, it would be best for
you to make no fuss, but accept it. One is apt to get grouchy when
young, but will always repent when he is grown up and thinks that it was
pity he hadn't been a little more patient. Take an old woman's advice
for once, and if Red Shirt-san says he will raise your salary, just take
it with thanks."

"It's none of business of you old people."

The old lady withdrew in silence. The old man is heard singing "utai" in
the off-key voice. "Utai," I think, is a stunt which purposely makes a
whole show a hard nut to crack by giving to it difficult tunes, whereas
one could better understand it by reading it. I cannot fathom what is in
the mind of the old man who groans over it every night untired. But I'm
not in a position to be fooling with "utai." Red Shirt said he would
have my salary raised, and though I did not care much about it, I
accepted it because there was no use of leaving the money lying around.
But I cannot, for the love of Mike, be so inconsiderate as to skin the
salary of a fellow teacher who is being transferred against his will.
What in thunder do they mean by sending him away so far as Nobeoka when
the fellow prefers to remain in his old position? Even
Dazai-no-Gonnosutsu did not have to go farther than about Hakata; even
Matagoro Kawai [11] stopped at Sagara. I shall not feel satisfied unless
I see Red Shirt and tell him I refuse the raise.

[Footnote 11: The persons in exile, well-known in Japanese history.]

I dressed again and went to his house. The same younger brother of Red
Shirt again answered the bell, and looked at me with eyes which plainly
said, "You here again?" I will come twice or thrice or as many times as
I want to if there is business. I might rouse them out of their beds at
midnight;--it is possible, who knows. Don't mistake me for one coming to
coax the head teacher. I was here to give back my salary. The younger
brother said that there is a visitor just now, and I told him the front
door will do; won't take more than a minute, and he went in. Looking
about my feet, I found a pair of thin, matted wooden clogs, and I heard
some one in the house saying, "Now we're banzai." I noticed that the
visitor was Clown. Nobody but Clown could make such a squeaking voice
and wear such clogs as are worn by cheap actors.

After a while Red Shirt appeared at the door with a lamp in his hand,
and said, "Come in; it's no other than Mr. Yoshikawa."

"This is good enough," I said, "it won't take long." I looked at his
face which was the color of a boiled lobster. He seemed to have been
drinking with Clown.

"You told me that you would raise my salary, but I've changed my mind,
and have come here to decline the offer."

Red Shirt, thrusting out the lamp forward, and intently staring at me,
was unable to answer at the moment. He appeared blank. Did he think it
strange that here was one fellow, only one in the world, who does not
want his salary raised, or was he taken aback that I should come back so
soon even if I wished to decline it, or was it both combined, he stood
there silent with his mouth in a queer shape.

"I accepted your offer because I understood that Mr. Koga was being
transferred by his own preference......."

"Mr. Koga is really going to be transferred by his own preference."

"No, Sir. He would like to stay here. He doesn't mind his present salary
if he can stay."

"Have you heard it from Mr. Koga himself?"

"No, not from him."

"Then, from who?"

"The old lady in my boarding house told me what she heard from the
mother of Mr. Koga."

"Then the old woman in your boarding house told you so?"

"Well, that's about the size of it."

"Excuse me, but I think you are wrong. According to what you say, it
seems as if you believe what the old woman in the boarding house tells
you, but would not believe what your head teacher tells you. Am I right
to understand it that way?"

I was stuck. A Bachelor of Arts is confoundedly good in oratorical
combat. He gets hold of unexpected point, and pushes the other backward.
My father used to tell me that I am too careless and no good, and now
indeed I look that way. I ran out of the house on the moment's impulse
when I heard the story from the old lady, and in fact I had not heard
the story from either Hubbard Squash or his mother. In consequence, when
I was challenged in this Bachelor-of-Arts fashion, it was a bit
difficult to defend myself.

I could not defend his frontal attack, but I had already declared in my
mind a lack of confidence on Red Shirt. The old lady in the boarding
house may be tight and a grabber, I do not doubt it, but she is a woman
who tells no lie. She is not double faced like Red Shirt, I was
helpless, so I answered.

"What you say might be right,--anyway, I decline the raise."

"That's still funnier. I thought your coming here now was because you
had found a certain reason for which you could not accept the raise.
Then it is hard to understand to see you still insisting on declining
the raise in spite of the reason having been eradicated by my
explanation."

"It may be hard to understand, but anyway I don't want it."

"If you don't like it so much, I wouldn't force it on you. But if you
change your mind within two or three hours with no particular reason, it
would affect your credit in future."

"I don't care if it does affect it."

"That can't be. Nothing is more important than credit for us. Supposing,
the boss of the boarding house......."

"Not the boss, but the old lady."

"Makes no difference,--suppose what the old woman in the boarding house
told you was true, the raise of your salary is not to be had by reducing
the income of Mr. Koga, is it? Mr. Koga is going to Nobeoka; his
successor is coming. He comes on a salary a little less than that of Mr.
Koga, and we propose to add the surplus money to your salary, and you
need not be shy. Mr. Koga will be promoted; the successor is to start on
less pay, and if you could be raised, I think everything be satisfactory
to all concerned. If you don't like it, that's all right, but suppose
you think it over once more at home?"

My brain is not of the best stuff, and if another fellow flourishes his
eloquence like this, I usually think, "Well, perhaps I was wrong," and
consider myself defeated, but not so to-night. From the time I came to
this town I felt prejudiced against Red Shirt. Once I had thought of him
in a different light, taking him for a fellow kind-hearted and
feminished. His kindness, however, began to look like anything but
kindness, and as a result, I have been getting sick of him. So no matter
how he might glory himself in logical grandiloquence, or how he might
attempt to out-talk me in a head-teacher-style, I don't care a snap. One
who shines in argument is not necessarily a good fellow, while the other
who is out-talked is not necessarily a bad fellow, either. Red Shirt is
very, very reasonable as far as his reasoning goes, but however graceful
he may appear, he cannot win my respect. If money, authority or
reasoning can command admiration, loansharks, police officers or college
professors should be liked best by all. I cannot be moved in the least
by the logic by so insignificant a fellow as the head teacher of a
middle school. Man works by preference, not by logic.

"What you say is right, but I have begun to dislike the raise, so I
decline. It will be the same if I think it over. Good by." And I left
the house of Red Shirt. The solitary milky way hung high in the sky.



CHAPTER IX.


When I went to the school, in the morning of the day the farewell dinner
party was to be held, Porcupine suddenly spoke to me;

"The other day I asked you to quit the Ikagins because Ikagin begged of
me to have you leave there as you were too tough, and I believed him.
But I heard afterward that Ikagin is a crook and often passes imitation
of famous drawings for originals. I think what he told me about you must
be a lie. He tried to sell pictures and curios to you, but as you shook
him off, he told some false stories on you. I did very wrong by you
because I did not know his character, and wish you would forgive me."
And he offered me a lengthy apology.

Without saying a word, I took up the one sen and a half which was lying
on the desk of Porcupine, and put it into my purse. He asked me in a
wondering tone, if I meant to take it back. I explained, "Yes. I didn't
like to have you treat me and expected to pay this back at all hazard,
but as I think about it, I would rather have you treated me after all;
so I'm going to take it back."

Porcupine laughed heartily and asked me why I had not taken it back
sooner. I told him that I wanted to more than once, in fact, but somehow
felt shy and left it there. I was sick of that one sen and a half these
days that I shunned the sight of it when I came to the school, I said.
He said "You're a deucedly unyielding sport," and I answered "You're
obstinate." Then ensued the following give-and-take between us two;

"Where were you born anyway?"

"I'm a Yedo kid."

"Ah, a Yedo kid, eh? No wonder I thought you a pretty stiff neck."

"And you?"

"I'm from Aizu."

"Ha, Aizu guy, eh? You've got reason to be obstinate. Going to the
farewell dinner to-day?"

"Sure. You?"

"Of course I am. I intend to go down to the beach to see Koga-san off
when he leaves."

"The farewell dinner should be a big blow-out. You come and see. I'm
going to get soused to the neck."

"You get loaded all you want. I quit the place right after I finish my
plates. Only fools fight booze."

"You're a fellow who picks up a fight too easy. It shows up the
characteristic of the Yedo kid well."

"I don't care. Say, before you go to the farewell dinner, come to see
me. I want to tell you something."

Porcupine came to my room as promised. I had been in full sympathy with
Hubbard Squash these days, and when it came to his farewell dinner, my
pity for him welled up so much that I wished I could go to Nobeoka for
him myself. I thought of making a parting address of burning eloquence
at the dinner to grace the occasion, but my speech which rattles off
like that of the excited spieler of New York would not become the place.
I planned to take the breath out of Red Shirt by employing Porcupine who
has a thunderous voice. Hence my invitation to him before we started for
the party.

I commenced by explaining the Madonna affair, but Porcupine, needless to
say, knew more about it than I. Telling about my meeting Red Shirt on
the Nozeri river, I called him a fool. Porcupine then said; "You call
everybody a fool. You called me a fool to-day at the school. If I'm a
fool, Red Shirt isn't," and insisted that he was not in the same group
with Red Shirt. "Then Red Shirt may be a four-flusher," I said and he
approved this new alias with enthusiasm. Porcupine is physically strong,
but when it comes to such terms, he knows less than I do. I guess all
Aizu guys are about the same.

Then, when I disclosed to him about the raise of my salary and the
advance hint on my promotion by Red Shirt, Porcupine pished, and said,
"Then he means to discharge me." "Means to discharge you? But you mean
to get discharged?" I asked. "Bet you, no. If I get fired, Red Shirt
will have to go with me," he remarked with a lordly air. I insisted on
knowing how he was going to get Red Shirt kicked out with him, and he
answered that he had not thought so far yet. Yes, Porcupine looks
strong, but seems to be possessed of no abundance of brain power. I told
him about my refusal of the raise of my salary, and the Gov'nur was much
pleased, praising me with the remark, "That's the stuff for Yedo kids."

"If Hubbard Squash does not like to go down to Nobeoka, why didn't you
do something to enable him remain here," I asked, and Porcupine said
that when he heard the story from Hubbard Squash, everything had been
settled already, but he had asked the principal twice and Red Shirt once
to have the transfer order cancelled, but to no purpose. Porcupine
bitterly condemned Hubbard Squash for being too good-natured. If Hubbard
Squash, he said, had either flatly refused or delayed the answer on the
pretext of considering it, when Red Shirt raised the question of
transfer, it would have been better for him. But he was fooled by the
oily tongue of Red Shirt, had accepted the transfer outright, and all
efforts by Porcupine who was moved by the tearful appeal of the mother,
proved unavailing.

I said; "The transfer of Koga is nothing but a trick of Red Shirt to cop
the Madonna by sending Hubbard Squash away."

"Yes," said Porcupine "That must be. Red Shirt looks gentle, but plays
nasty tricks. He is a sonovagun for when some one finds fault with him,
he has excuses prepared already. Nothing but a sound thumping will be
effective for fellows like him."

He rolled up his sleeves over his plump arms as he spoke. I asked him,
by the way, if he knew jiujitsu, because his arms looked powerful. Then
he put force in his forearm, and told me to touch it. I felt its swelled
muscle which was hard as the pumic stone in the public bathhouse.

I was deeply impressed by his massive strength, and asked him if he
could not knock five or six of Red Shirt in a bunch. "Of course," he
said, and as he extended and bent back the arm, the lumpy muscle rolled
