
"Oh, I'm very glad!" said Levin, and Dolly fancied she saw
something touching, helpless, in his face as he said this and
looked silently into her face.

"Let me ask you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said Darya
Alexandrovna, smiling her kindly and rather mocking smile, "why
is it you are angry with Kitty?"

"I?  I'm not angry with her," said Levin.

"Yes, you are angry.  Why was it you did not come to see us nor
them when you were in Moscow?"

"Darya Alexandrovna," he said, blushing up to the roots of his
hair, "I wonder really that with your kind heart you don't feel
this.  How it is you feel no pity for me, if nothing else, when
you know..."

"What do I know?"

"You know I made an offer and that I was refused," said Levin,
and all the tenderness he had been feeling for Kitty a minute
before was replaced by a feeling of anger for the slight he had
suffered.

"What makes you suppose I know?"

"Because everybody knows it..."

"That's just where you are mistaken; I did not know it, though
I had guessed it was so."

"Well, now you know it."

"All I knew was that something had happened that made her
dreadfully miserable, and that she begged me never to speak of
it.  And if she would not tell me, she would certainly not speak
of it to anyone else.  But what did pass between you?  Tell me."

"I have told you."

"When was it?"

"When I was at their house the last time."

"Do you know that," said Darya Alexandrovna, "I am awfully,
awfully sorry for her.  You suffer only from pride...."

"Perhaps so," said Levin, "but..."

She interrupted him.

"But she, poor girl...I am awfully, awfully sorry for her.  Now I
see it all."

"Well, Darya Alexandrovna, you must excuse me," he said, getting
up.  "Good-bye, Darya Alexandrovna, till we meet again."

"No, wait a minute," she said, clutching him by the sleeve.
"Wait a minute, sit down."

"Please, please, don't let us talk of this," he said, sitting
down, and at the same time feeling rise up and stir within his
heart a hope he had believed to be buried.

"If I did not like you," she said, and tears came into her eyes;
"if I did not know you, as I do know you .  .  ."

The feeling that had seemed dead revived more and more, rose up
and took possession of Levin's heart.

"Yes, I understand it all now," said Darya Alexandrovna.  "You
can't understand it; for you men, who are free and make your own
choice, it's always clear whom you love.  But a girl's in a
position of suspense, with all a woman's or maiden's modesty, a
girl who sees you men from afar, who takes everything on trust,--
a girl may have, and often has, such a feeling that she cannot
tell what to say."

"Yes, if the heart does not speak..."

"No, the heart does speak; but just consider: you men have views
about a girl, you come to the house, you make friends, you
criticize, you wait to see if you have found what you love, and
then, when you are sure you love her, you make an offer...."

"Well, that's not quite it."

"Anyway you make an offer, when your love is ripe or when the
balance has completely turned between the two you are choosing
from.  But a girl is not asked.  She is expected to make her
choice, and yet she cannot choose, she can only answer 'yes' or
'no.'"

"Yes, to choose between me and Vronsky," thought Levin, and the
dead thing that had come to life within him died again, and only
weighed on his heart and set it aching.

"Darya Alexandrovna," he said, "that's how one chooses a new
dress or some purchase or other, not love.  The choice has been
made, and so much the better....  And there can be no repeating
it."

"Ah, pride, pride!" said Darya Alexandrovna, as though despising
him for the baseness of this feeling in comparison with that
other feeling which only women know.  "At the time when you made
Kitty an offer she was just in a position in which she could not
answer.  She was in doubt.  Doubt between you and Vronsky.  Him
she was seeing every day, and you she had not seen for a long
while.  Supposing she had been older...I, for instance, in her
place could have felt no doubt.  I always disliked him, and so it
has turned out."

Levin recalled Kitty's answer.  She had said: "_No, that cannot
be_..."

"Darya Alexandrovna," he said dryly, "I appreciate your
confidence in me; I believe you are making a mistake.  But
whether I am right or wrong, that pride you so despise makes any
thought of Katerina Alexandrovna out of the question for me,--
you understand, utterly out of the question."

"I will only say one thing more: you know that I am speaking of
my sister, whom I love as I love my own children.  I don't say
she cared for you, all I meant to say is that her refusal at that
moment proves nothing."

"I don't know!" said Levin, jumping up.  "If you only knew how
you are hurting me.  It's just as if a child of yours were dead,
and they were to say to you: He would have been like this and
like that, and he might have lived, and how happy you would have
been in him.  But he's dead, dead, dead!..."

"How absurd you are!" said Darya Alexandrovna, looking with
mournful tenderness at Levin's excitement.  "Yes, I see it all
more and more clearly," she went on musingly.  "So you won't come
to see us, then, when Kitty's here?"

"No, I shan't come.  Of course I won't avoid meeting Katerina
Alexandrovna, but as far as I can, I will try to save her the
annoyance of my presence."

"You are very, very absurd," repeated Darya Alexandrovna, looking
with tenderness into his face.  "Very well then, let it be as
though we had not spoken of this.  What have you come for,
Tanya?" she said in French to the little girl who had come in.

"Where's my spade, mamma?"

"I speak French, and you must too."

The little girl tried to say it in French, but could not remember
the French for spade; the mother prompted her, and then told her
in French where to look for the spade.  And this made a
disagreeable impression on Levin.

Everything in Darya Alexandrovna's house and children struck him
now as by no means so charming as a little while before.  "And
what does she talk French with the children for?" he thought;
"how unnatural and false it is!  And the children feel it so:
Learning French and unlearning sincerity," he thought to himself,
unaware that Darya Alexandrovna had thought all that over twenty
times already, and yet, even at the cost of some loss of
sincerity, believed it necessary to teach her children French in
that way.

"But why are you going?  Do stay a little."

Levin stayed to tea; but his good-humor had vanished, and he felt
ill at ease.

After tea he went out into the hall to order his horses to be put
in, and, when he came back, he found Darya Alexandrovna greatly
disturbed, with a troubled face, and tears in her eyes.  While
Levin had been outside, an incident had occurred which had
utterly shattered all the happiness she had been feeling that
day, and her pride in her children.  Grisha and Tanya had been
fighting over a ball.  Darya Alexandrovna, hearing a scream in
the nursery, ran in and saw a terrible sight.  Tanya was pulling
Grisha's hair, while he, with a face hideous with rage, was
beating her with his fists wherever he could get at her.
Something snapped in Darya Alexandrovna's heart when she saw
this.  It was as if darkness had swooped down upon her life; she
felt that these children of hers, that she was so proud of, were
not merely most ordinary, but positively bad, ill-bred children,
with coarse, brutal propensities--wicked children.

She could not talk or think of anything else, and she could not
speak to Levin of her misery.

Levin saw she was unhappy and tried to comfort her, saying that
it showed nothing bad, that all children fight; but, even as he
said it, he was thinking in his heart: "No, I won't be
artificial and talk French with my children; but my children
won't be like that.  All one has to do is not spoil children, not
to distort their nature, and they'll be delightful.  No, my
children won't be like that."

He said good-bye and drove away, and she did not try to keep him.



Chapter 11


In the middle of July the elder of the village on Levin's
sister's estate, about fifteen miles from Pokrovskoe, came to
Levin to report on how things were going there and on the hay.
The chief source of income on his sister's estate was from the
riverside meadows.  In former years the hay had been bought by
the peasants for twenty roubles the three acres.  When Levin took
over the management of the estate, he thought on examining the
grasslands that they were worth more, and he fixed the price at
twenty-five roubles the three acres.  The peasants would not give
that price, and, as Levin suspected, kept off other purchasers.
Then Levin had driven over himself, and arranged to have the
grass cut, partly by hired labor, partly at a payment of a
certain proportion of the crop.  His own peasants put every
hindrance they could in the way of this new arrangement, but it
was carried out, and the first year the meadows had yielded a
profit almost double.  The previous year--which was the third
year--the peasants had maintained the same opposition to the
arrangement, and the hay had been cut on the same system.  This
year the peasants were doing all the mowing for a third of the
hay crop, and the village elder had come now to announce that the
hay had been cut, and that, fearing rain, they had invited the
counting-house clerk over, had divided the crop in his presence,
and had raked together eleven stacks as the owner's share.  From
the vague answers to his question how much hay had been cut on
the principal meadow, from the hurry of the village elder who had
made the division, not asking leave, from the whole tone of the
peasant, Levin perceived that there was something wrong in the
division of the hay, and made up his mind to drive over himself
to look into the matter.

Arriving for dinner at the village, and leaving his horse at the
cottage of an old friend of his, the husband of his brother's
wet-nurse, Levin went to see the old man in his bee-house,
wanting to find out from him the truth about the hay.
Parmenitch, a talkative, comely old man, gave Levin a very warm
welcome, showed him all he was doing, told him everything about
his bees and the swarms of that year; but gave vague and
unwilling answers to Levin's inquiries about the mowing.  This
confirmed Levin still more in his suspicions.  He went to the
hay fields and examined the stacks.  The haystacks could not
possibly contain fifty wagon-loads each, and to convict the
peasants Levin ordered the wagons that had carried the hay to be
brought up directly, to lift one stack, and carry it into the
barn.  There turned out to be only thirty-two loads in the stack.
In spite of the village elder's assertions about the
compressibility of hay, and its having settled down in the
stacks, and his swearing that everything had been done in the
fear of God, Levin stuck to his point that the hay had been
divided without his orders, and that, therefore, he would not
accept that hay as fifty loads to a stack.  After a prolonged
dispute the matter was decided by the peasants taking these
eleven stacks, reckoning them as fifty loads each.  The arguments
and the division of the haycocks lasted the whole afternoon.
When the last of the hay had been divided, Levin, intrusting the
superintendence of the rest to the counting-house clerk, sat down
on a haycock marked off by a stake of willow, and looked
admiringly at the meadow swarming with peasants.

In front of him, in the bend of the river beyond the marsh, moved
a bright-colored line of peasant women, and the scattered hay was
being rapidly formed into gray winding rows over the pale green
stubble.  After the women came the men with pitchforks, and from
the gray rows there were growing up broad, high, soft haycocks.
To the left, carts were rumbling over the meadow that had been
already cleared, and one after another the haycocks vanished,
flung up in huge forkfuls, and in their place there were rising
heavy cartloads of fragrant hay hanging over the horses'
hind-quarters.

"What weather for haying!  What hay it'll be!" said an old man,
squatting down beside Levin.  "It's tea, not hay!  It's like
scattering grain to the ducks, the way they pick it up!" he
added, pointing to the growing haycocks.  "Since dinnertime
they've carried a good half of it."

"The last load, eh?" he shouted to a young peasant, who drove by,
standing in the front of an empty cart, shaking the cord reins.

"The last, dad!" the lad shouted back, pulling in the horse, and,
smiling, he looked round at a bright, rosy-checked peasant girl
who sat in the cart smiling too, and drove on.

"Who's that?  Your son?" asked Levin.

"My baby," said the old man with a tender smile.

"What a fine fellow!"

"The lad's all right."

"Married already?"

"Yes, it's two years last St. Philip's day."

"Any children?"

"Children indeed!  Why, for over a year he was innocent as a babe
himself, and bashful too," answered the old man.  "Well, the hay!
It's as fragrant as tea!" he repeated, wishing to change the
subject.

Levin looked more attentively at Ivan Parmenov and his wife.
They were loading a haycock onto the cart not far from him.  Ivan
Parmenov was standing on the cart, taking, laying in place, and
stamping down the huge bundles of hay, which his pretty young
wife deftly handed up to him, at first in armfuls, and then on
the pitchfork.  The young wife worked easily, merrily, and
dexterously.  The close-packed hay did not once break away off
her fork.  First she gathered it together, stuck the fork into
it, then with a rapid, supple movement leaned the whole weight of
her body on it, and at once with a bend of her back under the red
belt she drew herself up, and arching her full bosom under the
white smock, with a smart turn swung the fork in her arms, and
flung the bundle of hay high onto the cart.  Ivan, obviously
doing his best to save her every minute of unnecessary labor,
made haste, opening his arms to clutch the bundle and lay it in
the cart.  As she raked together what was left of the hay, the
young wife shook off the bits of hay that had fallen on her neck,
and straightening the red kerchief that had dropped forward over
her white brow, not browned like her face by the sun, she crept
under the cart to tie up the load.  Ivan directed her how to
fasten the cord to the cross-piece, and at something she said he
laughed aloud.  In the expressions of both faces was to be seen
vigorous, young, freshly awakened love.



Chapter 12


The load was tied on.  Ivan jumped down and took the quiet, sleek
horse by the bridle.  The young wife flung the rake up on the
load, and with a bold step, swinging her arms, she went to join
the women, who were forming a ring for the haymakers' dance.
Ivan drove off to the road and fell into line with the other
loaded carts.  The peasant women, with their rakes on their
shoulders, gay with bright flowers, and chattering with ringing,
merry voices, walked behind the hay cart.  One wild untrained
female voice broke into a song, and sang it alone through a
verse, and then the same verse was taken up and repeated by half
a hundred strong healthy voices, of all sorts, coarse and fine,
singing in unison.

The women, all singing, began to come close to Levin, and he felt
as though a storm were swooping down upon him with a thunder of
merriment.  The storm swooped down, enveloped him and the haycock
on which he was lying, and the other haycocks, and the
wagon-loads, and the whole meadow and distant fields all seemed
to be shaking and singing to the measures of this wild merry song
with its shouts and whistles and clapping.  Levin felt envious of
this health and mirthfulness; he longed to take part in the
expression of this joy of life.  But he could do nothing, and had
to lie and look on and listen.  When the peasants, with their
singing, had vanished out of sight and hearing, a weary feeling
of despondency at his own isolation, his physical inactivity, his
alienation from this world, came over Levin.

Some of the very peasants who had been most active in wrangling
with him over the hay, some whom he had treated with contumely,
and who had tried to cheat him, those very peasants had greeted
him goodhumoredly, and evidently had not, were incapable of
having any feeling of rancor against him, any regret, any
recollection even of having tried to deceive him.  All that was
drowned in a sea of merry common labor.  God gave the day, God
gave the strength.  And the day and the strength were consecrated
to labor, and that labor was its own reward.  For whom the labor?
What would be its fruits?  These were idle considerations--
beside the point.

Often Levin had admired this life, often he had a sense of envy
of the men who led this life; but today for the first time,
especially under the influence of what he had seen in the
attitude of Ivan Parmenov to his young wife, the idea presented
itself definitely to his mind that it was in his power to
exchange the dreary, artificial, idle, and individualistic life
he was leading for this laborious, pure, and socially delightful
life.

The old man who had been sitting beside him had long ago gone
home; the people had all separated.  Those who lived near had
gone home, while those who came from far were gathered into a
group for supper, and to spend the night in the meadow.  Levin,
unobserved by the peasants, still lay on the haycock, and still
looked on and listened and mused.  The peasants who remained for
the night in the meadow scarcely slept all the short summer
night.  At first there was the sound of merry talk and laughing
all together over the supper, then singing again and laughter.

All the long day of toil had left no trace in them but lightness
of heart.  Before the early dawn all was hushed.  Nothing was to
be heard but the night sounds of the frogs that never ceased in
the marsh, and the horses snorting in the mist that rose over the
meadow before the morning.  Rousing himself, Levin got up from
the haycock, and looking at the stars, he saw that the night was
over.

"Well, what am I going to do? How am I to set about it?" he
said to himself, trying to express to himself all the thoughts
and feelings he had passed through in that brief night.  All the
thoughts and feelings he had passed through fell into three
separate trains of thought.  One was the renunciation of his old
life, of his utterly useless education.  This renunciation gave
him satisfaction, and was easy and simple.  Another series of
thoughts and mental images related to the life he longed to live
now.  The simplicity, the purity, the sanity of this life he felt
clearly, and he was convinced he would find in it the content,
the peace, and the dignity, of the lack of which he was so
miserably conscious.  But a third series of ideas turned upon the
question how to effect this transition from the old life to the
new.  And there nothing took clear shape for him.  "Have a wife?
Have work and the necessity of work?  Leave Pokrovskoe?  Buy
land?  Become a member of a peasant community?  Marry a peasant
girl?  How am I to set about it?" he asked himself again, and
could not find an answer.  "I haven't slept all night, though,
and I can't think it out clearly," he said to himself.  "I'll
work it out later.  One thing's certain, this night has decided
my fate.  All my old dreams of home life were absurd, not the
real thing," he told himself.  "It's all ever so much simpler and
better..."

"How beautiful!" he thought, looking at the strange, as it were,
mother-of-pearl shell of white fleecy cloudlets resting right
over his head in the middle of the sky.  "How exquisite it all is
in this exquisite night!  And when was there time for that
cloud-shell to form? Just now I looked at the sky, and there was
nothing in it--only two white streaks.  Yes, and so
imperceptibly too my views of life changed!"

He went out of the meadow and walked along the highroad towards
the village.  A slight wind arose, and the sky looked gray and
sullen.  The gloomy moment had come that usually precedes the
dawn, the full triumph of light over darkness.

Shrinking from the cold, Levin walked rapidly, looking at the
ground.  "What's that?  Someone coming," he thought, catching the
tinkle of bells, and lifting his head.  Forty paces from him a
carriage with four horses harnessed abreast was driving towards
him along the grassy road on which he was walking.  The
shaft-horses were tilted against the shafts by the ruts, but the
dexterous driver sitting on the box held the shaft over the ruts,
so that the wheels ran on the smooth part of the road.

This was all Levin noticed, and without wondering who it could
be, he gazed absently at the coach.

In the coach was an old lady dozing in one corner, and at the
window, evidently only just awake, sat a young girl holding in
both hands the ribbons of a white cap.  With a face full of light
and thought, full of a subtle, complex inner life, that was
remote from Levin, she was gazing beyond him at the glow of the
sunrise.

At the very instant when this apparition was vanishing, the
truthful eyes glanced at him.  She recognized him, and her face
lighted up with wondering delight.

He could not be mistaken.  There were no other eyes like those in
the world.  There was only one creature in the world that could
concentrate for him all the brightness and meaning of life.  It
was she.  It was Kitty.  He understood that she was driving to
Ergushovo from the railway station.  And everything that had been
stirring Levin during that sleepless night, all the resolutions
he had made, all vanished at once.  He recalled with horror his
dreams of marrying a peasant girl.  There only, in the carriage
that had crossed over to the other side of the road, and was
rapidly disappearing, there only could he find the solution of
the riddle of his life, which had weighed so agonizingly upon him
of late.

She did not look out again.  The sound of the carriage-springs
was no longer audible, the bells could scarcely be heard.  The
barking of dogs showed the carriage had reached the village, and
all that was left was the empty fields all round, the village in
front, and he himself isolated and apart from it all, wandering
lonely along the deserted highroad.

He glanced at the sky, expecting to find there the cloud shell he
had been admiring and taking as the symbol of the ideas and
feelings of that night.  There was nothing in the sky in the
least like a shell.  There, in the remote heights above, a
mysterious change had been accomplished.  There was no trace of
shell, and there was stretched over fully half the sky an even
cover of tiny and ever tinier cloudlets.  The sky had grown blue
and bright; and with the same softness, but with the same
remoteness, it met his questioning gaze.

"No," he said to himself, "however good that life of simplicity
and toil may be, I cannot go back to it.  I love _her_."



Chapter 13


None but those who were most intimate with Alexey Alexandrovitch
knew that, while on the surface the coldest and most reasonable
of men, he had one weakness quite opposed to the general trend of
his character.  Alexey Alexandrovitch could not hear or see a
child or woman crying without being moved.  The sight of tears
threw him into a state of nervous agitation, and he utterly lost
all power of reflection.  The chief secretary of his department
and his private secretary were aware of this, and used to warn
women who came with petitions on no account to give way to tears,
if they did not want to ruin their chances.  "He will get angry,
and will not listen to you," they used to say.  And as a fact, in
such cases the emotional disturbance set up in Alexey
Alexandrovitch by the sight of tears found expression in hasty
anger.  "I can do nothing.  Kindly leave the room!" he would
commonly cry in such cases.

When returning from the races Anna had informed him of her
relations with Vronsky, and immediately afterwards had burst into
tears, hiding her face in her hands, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for
all the fury aroused in him against her, was aware at the same
time of a rush of that emotional disturbance always produced in
him by tears.  Conscious of it, and conscious that any expression
of his feelings at that minute would be out of keeping with the
position, he tried to suppress every manifestation of life in
himself, and so neither stirred nor looked at her.  This was what
had caused that strange expression of deathlike rigidity in his
face which had so impressed Anna.

When they reached the house he helped her to get out of the
carriage, and making an effort to master himself, took leave of
her with his usual urbanity, and uttered that phrase that bound
him to nothing; he said that tomorrow he would let her know his
decision.

His wife's words, confirming his worst suspicions, had sent a
cruel pang to the heart of Alexey Alexandrovitch.  That pang was
intensified by the strange feeling of physical pity for her set
up by her tears.  But when he was all alone in the carriage
Alexey Alexandrovitch, to his surprise and delight, felt complete
relief both from this pity and from the doubts and agonies of
jealousy.

He experienced the sensations of a man who has had a tooth out
after suffering long from toothache.  After a fearful agony and a
sense of something huge, bigger than the head itself, being torn
out of his jaw, the sufferer, hardly able to believe in his own
good luck, feels all at once that what has so long poisoned his
existence and enchained his attention, exists no longer, and that
he can live and think again, and take interest in other things
besides his tooth.  This feeling Alexey Alexandrovitch was
experiencing.  The agony had been strange and terrible, but now
it was over; he felt that he could live again and think of
something other than his wife.

"No honor, no heart, no religion; a corrupt woman.  I always
knew it and always saw it, though I tried to deceive myself to
spare her," he said to himself.  And it actually seemed to him
that he always had seen it: he recalled incidents of their past
life, in which he had never seen anything wrong before--now
these incidents proved clearly that she had always been a corrupt
woman.  "I made a mistake in linking my life to hers; but there
was nothing wrong in my mistake, and so I cannot be unhappy.
It's not I that am to blame," he told himself, "but she.  But I
have nothing to do with her.  She does not exist for me..."

Everything relating to her and her son, towards whom his
sentiments were as much changed as towards her, ceased to
interest him.  The only thing that interested him now was the
question of in what way he could best, with most propriety and
comfort for himself, and thus with most justice, extricate
himself from the mud with which she had spattered him in her
fall, and then proceed along his path of active, honorable, and
useful existence.

"I cannot be made unhappy by the fact that a contemptible woman
has committed a crime.  I have only to find the best way out of
the difficult position in which she has placed me.  And I shall
find it," he said to himself, frowning more and more.  "I'm not
the first nor the last."  And to say nothing of historical
instances dating from the "Fair Helen" of Menelaus, recently
revived in the memory of all, a whole list of contemporary
examples of husbands with unfaithful wives in the highest society
rose before Alexey Alexandrovitch's imagination.  "Daryalov,
Poltavsky, Prince Karibanov, Count Paskudin, Dram....  Yes, even
Dram, such an honest, capable fellow...Semyonov, Tchagin,
Sigonin," Alexey Alexandrovitch remembered.  "Admitting that a
certain quite irrational _ridicule_ falls to the lot of these men,
yet I never saw anything but a misfortune in it, and always felt
sympathy for it," Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, though
indeed this was not the fact, and he had never felt sympathy for
misfortunes of that kind, but the more frequently he had heard of
instances of unfaithful wives betraying their husbands, the more
highly he had thought of himself.  "It is a misfortune which may
befall anyone.  And this misfortune has befallen me.  The only
thing to be done is to make the best of the position."

And he began passing in review the methods of proceeding of men
who had been in the same position that he was in.

"Daryalov fought a duel...."

The duel had particularly fascinated the thoughts of Alexey
Alexandrovitch in his youth, just because he was physically a
coward, and was himself well aware of the fact.  Alexey
Alexandrovitch could not without horror contemplate the idea of a
pistol aimed at himself, and had never made use of any weapon in his
life.  This horror had in his youth set him pondering on dueling,
and picturing himself in a position in which he would have to
expose his life to danger.  Having attained success and an
established position in the world, he had long ago forgotten this
feeling; but the habitual bent of feeling reasserted itself, and
dread of his own cowardice proved even now so strong that Alexey
Alexandrovitch spent a long while thinking over the question of
dueling in all its aspects, and hugging the idea of a duel,
though he was fully aware beforehand that he would never under
any circumstances fight one.

"There's no doubt our society is still so barbarous (it's not the
same in England) that very many"--and among these were those
whose opinion Alexey Alexandrovitch particularly valued--"look
favorably on the duel; but what result is attained by it? Suppose
I call him out," Alexey Alexandrovitch went on to himself, and
vividly picturing the night he would spend after the challenge,
and the pistol aimed at him, he shuddered, and knew that he never
would do it--"suppose I call him out.  Suppose I am taught," he
went on musing, "to shoot; I press the trigger," he said to
himself, closing his eyes, "and it turns out I have killed him,"
Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, and he shook his head as
though to dispel such silly ideas.  "What sense is there in
murdering a man in order to define one's relation to a guilty
wife and son?  I should still just as much have to decide what I
ought to do with her.  But what is more probable and what would
doubtless occur--I should be killed or wounded.  I, the
innocent person, should be the victim--killed or wounded.  It's
even more senseless.  But apart from that, a challenge to fight
would be an act hardly honest on my side.  Don't I know perfectly
well that my friends would never allow me to fight a duel--would
never allow the life of a statesman, needed by Russia, to be
exposed to danger?  Knowing perfectly well beforehand that the
matter would never come to real danger, it would amount to my
simply trying to gain a certain sham reputation by such a
challenge.  That would be dishonest, that would be false, that
would be deceiving myself and others.  A duel is quite
irrational, and no one expects it of me.  My aim is simply to
safeguard my reputation, which is essential for the uninterrupted
pursuit of my public duties."  Official duties, which had always
been of great consequence in Alexey Alexandrovitch's eyes, seemed
of special importance to his mind at this moment.  Considering
and rejecting the duel, Alexey Alexandrovitch turned to
divorce--another solution selected by several of the husbands he
remembered.  Passing in mental review all the instances he knew
of divorces (there were plenty of them in the very highest
society with which he was very familiar), Alexey Alexandrovitch
could not find a single example in which the object of divorce
was that which he had in view.  In all these instances the
husband had practically ceded or sold his unfaithful wife, and
the very party which, being in fault, had not the right to
contract a fresh marriage, had formed counterfeit,
pseudo-matrimonial ties with a self-styled husband.  In his own
case, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that a legal divorce, that is to
say, one in which only the guilty wife would be repudiated, was
impossible of attainment.  He saw that the complex conditions of
the life they led made the coarse proofs of his wife's guilt,
required by the law, out of the question; he saw that a certain
refinement in that life would not admit of such proofs being
brought forward, even if he had them, and that to bring forward
such proofs would damage him in the public estimation more than
it would her.

An attempt at divorce could lead to nothing but a public scandal,
which would be a perfect godsend to his enemies for calumny and
attacks on his high position in society.  His chief object, to
define the position with the least amount of disturbance
possible, would not be attained by divorce either.  Moreover, in
the event of divorce, or even of an attempt to obtain a divorce,
it was obvious that the wife broke off all relations with the
husband and threw in her lot with the lover.  And in spite of the
complete, as he supposed, contempt and indifference he now felt
for his wife, at the bottom of his heart Alexey Alexandrovitch
still had one feeling left in regard to her--a disinclination to
see her free to throw in her lot with Vronsky, so that her crime
would be to her advantage.  The mere notion of this so
exasperated Alexey Alexandrovitch, that directly it rose to his
mind he groaned with inward agony, and got up and changed his
place in the carriage, and for a long while after, he sat with
scowling brows, wrapping his numbed and bony legs in the fleecy
rug.

"Apart from formal divorce, One might still do like Karibanov,
Paskudin, and that good fellow Dram--that is, separate from
one's wife," he went on thinking, when he had regained his
composure.  But this step too presented the same drawback of
public scandal as a divorce, and what was more, a separation,
quite as much as a regular divorce, flung his wife into the arms
of Vronsky.  "No, it's out of the question, out of the question!"
he said again, twisting his rug about him again.  "I cannot be
unhappy, but neither she nor he ought to be happy."

The feeling of jealousy, which had tortured him during the period
of uncertainty, had passed away at the instant when the tooth had
been with agony extracted by his wife's words.  But that feeling
had been replaced by another, the desire, not merely that she
should not be triumphant, but that she should get due punishment
for her crime.  He did not acknowledge this feeling, but at the
bottom of his heart he longed for her to suffer for having
destroyed his peace of mind--his honor.  And going once again
over the conditions inseparable from a duel, a divorce, a
separation, and once again rejecting them, Alexey Alexandrovitch
felt convinced that there was only one solution,--to keep her
with him, concealing what had happened from the world, and using
every measure in his power to break off the intrigue, and still
more--though this he did not admit to himself--to punish her.
"I must inform her of my conclusion, that thinking over the
terrible position in which she has placed her family, all other
solutions will be worse for both sides than an external _status
quo_, and that such I agree to retain, on the strict condition of
obedience on her part to my wishes, that is to say, cessation of
all intercourse with her lover."  When this decision had been
finally adopted, another weighty consideration occurred to Alexey
Alexandrovitch in support of it.  "By such a course only shall I
be acting in accordance with the dictates of religion," he told
himself.  "In adopting this course, I am not casting off a
guilty wife, but giving her a chance of amendment; and, indeed,
difficult as the task will be to me, I shall devote part of my
energies to her reformation and salvation."

Though Alexey Alexandrovitch was perfectly aware that he could
not exert any moral influence over his wife, that such an attempt
at reformation could lead to nothing but falsity; though in
passing through these difficult moments he had not once thought
of seeking guidance in religion, yet now, when his conclusion
corresponded, as it seemed to him, with the requirements of
religion, this religious sanction to his decision gave him
complete satisfaction, and to some extent restored his peace of
mind.  He was pleased to think that, even in such an important
crisis in life, no one would be able to say that he had not acted
in accordance with the principles of that religion whose banner
he had always held aloft amid the general coolness and
indifference.  As he pondered over subsequent developments,
Alexey Alexandrovitch did not see, indeed, why his relations with
his wife should not remain practically the same as before.  No
doubt, she could never regain his esteem, but there was not, and
there could not be, any sort of reason that his existence should
be troubled, and that he should suffer because she was a bad and
faithless wife.  "Yes, time will pass; time, which arranges all
things, and the old relations will be reestablished," Alexey
Alexandrovitch told himself; "so far reestablished, that is, that
I shall not be sensible of a break in the continuity of my life.
She is bound to be unhappy, but I am not to blame, and so I
cannot be unhappy."



Chapter 14


As he neared Petersburg, Alexey Alexandrovitch not only adhered
entirely to his decision, but was even composing in his head the
letter he would write to his wife.  Going into the porter's room,
Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at the letters and papers brought
from his office, and directed that they should be brought to him
in his study.

"The horses can be taken out and I will see no one," he said in
answer to the porter, with a certain pleasure, indicative of his
agreeable frame of mind, emphasizing the words, "see no one."

In his study Alexey Alexandrovitch walked up and down twice, and
stopped at an immense writing-table, on which six candles had
already been lighted by the valet who had preceded him.  He
cracked his knuckles and sat down, sorting out his writing
appurtenances.  Putting his elbows on the table, he bent his head
on one side, thought a minute, and began to write, without
pausing for a second.  He wrote without using any form of address
to her, and wrote in French, making use of the plural "_vous_,"
which has not the same note of coldness as the corresponding
Russian form.

"At our last conversation, I notified you of my intention to
communicate to you my decision in regard to the subject of that
conversation.  Having carefully considered everything, I am
writing now with the object of fulfilling that promise.  My
decision is as follows.  Whatever your conduct may have been, I
do not consider myself justified in breaking the ties in which we
are bound by a Higher Power.  The family cannot be broken up by a
whim, a caprice, or even by the sin of one of the partners in the
marriage, and our life must go on as it has done in the past.
This is essential for me, for you, and for our son.  I am fully
persuaded that you have repented and do repent of what has called
forth the present letter, and that you will cooperate with me in
eradicating the cause of our estrangement, and forgetting the
past.  In the contrary event, you can conjecture what awaits you
and your son.  All this I hope to discuss more in detail in a
personal interview.  As the season is drawing to a close, I
would beg you to return to Petersburg as quickly as possible, not
later than Tuesday.  All necessary preparations shall be made for
your arrival here.  I beg you to note that I attach particular
significance to compliance with this request.

A. Karenin

"P.S.--I enclose the money which may be needed for your
expenses."

He read the letter through and felt pleased with it, and
especially that he had remembered to enclose money: there was
not a harsh word, not a reproach in it, nor was there undue
indulgence.  Most of all, it was a golden bridge for return.
Folding the letter and smoothing it with a massive ivory knife,
and putting it in an envelope with the money, he rang the bell
with the gratification it always afforded him to use the
well arranged appointments of his writing-table.

"Give this to the courier to be delivered to Anna Arkadyevna
tomorrow at the summer villa," he said, getting up.

"Certainly, your excellency; tea to be served in the study?"

Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered tea to be brought to the study, and
playing with the massive paper-knife, he moved to his easy chair,
near which there had been placed ready for him a lamp and the
French work on Egyptian hieroglyphics that he had begun.  Over
the easy chair there hung in a gold frame an oval portrait of
Anna, a fine painting by a celebrated artist.  Alexey
Alexandrovitch glanced at it.  The unfathomable eyes gazed
ironically and insolently at him.  Insufferably insolent and
challenging was the effect in Alexey Alexandrovitch's eyes of the
black lace about the head, admirably touched in by the painter,
the black hair and handsome white hand with one finger lifted,
covered with rings.  After looking at the portrait for a minute,
Alexey Alexandrovitch shuddered so that his lips quivered and he
uttered the sound "brrr," and turned away.  He made haste to sit
down in his easy chair and opened the book.  He tried to read,
but he could not revive the very vivid interest he had felt
before in Egyptian hieroglyphics.  He looked at the book and
thought of something else.  He thought not of his wife, but of a
complication that had arisen in his official life, which at the
time constituted the chief interest of it.  He felt that he had
penetrated more deeply than ever before into this intricate
affair, and that he had originated a leading idea--he could say
it without self-flattery--calculated to clear up the whole
business, to strengthen him in his official career, to discomfit
his enemies, and thereby to be of the greatest benefit to the
government.  Directly the servant had set the tea and left the
room, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up and went to the writing-table.
Moving into the middle of the table a portfolio of papers, with a
scarcely perceptible smile of self-satisfaction, he took a pencil
from a rack and plunged into the perusal of a complex report
relating to the present complication.  The complication was of
this nature: Alexey Alexandrovitch's characteristic quality as a
politician, that special individual qualification that every
rising functionary possesses, the qualification that with his
unflagging ambition, his reserve, his honesty, and with his
self-confidence had made his career, was his contempt for red
tape, his cutting down of correspondence, his direct contact,
wherever possible, with the living fact, and his economy.  It
happened that the famous Commission of the 2nd of June had set on
foot an inquiry into the irrigation of lands in the Zaraisky
province, which fell under Alexey Alexandrovitch's department,
and was a glaring example of fruitless expenditure and paper
reforms.  Alexey Alexandrovitch was aware of the truth of this.
The irrigation of these lands in the Zaraisky province had been
initiated by the predecessor of Alexey Alexandrovitch's
predecessor.  And vast sums of money had actually been spent and
were still being spent on this business, and utterly
unproductively, and the whole business could obviously lead to
nothing whatever.  Alexey Alexandrovitch had perceived this at
once on entering office, and would have liked to lay hands on the
Board of Irrigation.  But at first, when he did not yet feel
secure in his position, he knew it would affect too many
interests, and would be injudicious.  Later on he had been
engrossed in other questions, and had simply forgotten the Board
of Irrigation.  It went of itself, like all such boards, by the
mere force of inertia.  (Many people gained their livelihood by
the Board of Irrigation, especially one highly conscientious and
musical family: all the daughters played on stringed instruments,
and Alexey Alexandrovitch knew the family and had stood godfather
to one of the elder daughters.) The raising of this question by a
hostile department was in Alexey Alexandrovitch's opinion a
dishonorable proceeding, seeing that in every department there
were things similar and worse, which no one inquired into, for
well-known reasons of official etiquette.  However, now that the
glove had been thrown down to him, he had boldly picked it up and
demanded the appointment of a special commission to investigate
and verify the working of the Board of Irrigation of the lands in
the Zaraisky province.  But in compensation he gave no quarter to
the enemy either.  He demanded the appointment of another special
commission to inquire into the question of the Native Tribes
Organization Committee.  The question of the Native Tribes had
been brought up incidentally in the Commission of the 2nd of
June, and had been pressed forward actively by Alexey
Alexandrovitch as one admitting of no delay on account of the
deplorable condition of the native tribes.  In the commission
this question had been a ground of contention between several
departments.  The department hostile to Alexey Alexandrovitch
proved that the condition of the native tribes was exceedingly
flourishing, that the proposed reconstruction might be the ruin
of their prosperity, and that if there were anything wrong, it
arose mainly from the failure on the part of Alexey
Alexandrovitch's department to carry out the measures prescribed
by law.  Now Alexey Alexandrovitch intended to demand: First,
that a new commission should be formed which should be empowered
to investigate the condition of the native tribes on the spot;
secondly, if it should appear that the condition of the native
tribes actually was such as it appeared to be from the official
documents in the hands of the committee, that another new
scientific commission should be appointed to investigate the
deplorable condition of the native tribes from the--(1)
political, (2) administrative, (3) economic, (4) ethnographical,
(5) material, and (6) religious points of view; thirdly, that
evidence should be required from the rival department of the
measures that had been taken during the last ten years by that
department for averting the disastrous conditions in which the
native tribes were now placed; and fourthly and finally, that
that department explain why it had, as appeared from the evidence
before the committee, from No. 17,015 and 18,038, from December
5, 1863, and June 7, 1864, acted in direct contravention of the
intent of the law T...Act 18, and the note to Act 36.  A flash
of eagerness suffused the face of Alexey Alexandrovitch as he
rapidly wrote out a synopsis of these ideas for his own benefit.
Having filled a sheet of paper, he got up, rang, and sent a note
to the chief secretary of his department to look up certain
necessary facts for him.  Getting up and walking about the room,
he glanced again at the portrait, frowned, and smiled
contemptuously.  After reading a little more of the book on
Egyptian hieroglyphics, and renewing his interest in it, Alexey
Alexandrovitch went to bed at eleven o'clock, and recollecting as
he lay in bed the incident with his wife, he saw it now in by no
means such a gloomy light.



Chapter 15


Though Anna had obstinately and with exasperation contradicted
Vronsky when he told her their position was impossible, at the
bottom of her heart she regarded her own position as false and
dishonorable, and she longed with her whole soul to change it.
On the way home from the races she had told her husband the truth
in a moment of excitement, and in spite of the agony she had
suffered in doing so, she was glad of it.  After her husband had
left her, she told herself that she was glad, that now everything
was made clear, and at least there would be no more lying and
deception.  It seemed to her beyond doubt that her position was
now made clear forever.  It might be bad, this new position, but
it would be clear; there would be no indefiniteness or falsehood
about it.  The pain she had caused herself and her husband in
uttering those words would be rewarded now by everything being
made clear, she thought.  That evening she saw Vronsky, but she
did not tell him of what had passed between her and her husband,
though, to make the position definite, it was necessary to tell
him.

When she woke up next morning the first thing that rose to her
mind was what she had said to her husband, and those words seemed
to her so awful that she could not conceive now how she could
have brought herself to utter those strange, coarse words, and
could not imagine what would come of it.  But the words were
spoken, and Alexey Alexandrovitch had gone away without saying
anything.  "I saw Vronsky and did not tell him.  At the very
instant he was going away I would have turned him back and told
him, but I changed my mind, because it was strange that I had
not told him the first minute.  Why was it I wanted to tell him
and did not tell him?"  And in answer to this question a burning
blush of shame spread over her face.  She knew what had kept her
from it, she knew that she had been ashamed.  Her position, which
had seemed to her simplified the night before, suddenly struck
her now as not only not simple, but as absolutely hopeless.  She
felt terrified at the disgrace, of which she had not ever thought
before.  Directly she thought of what her husband would do, the
most terrible ideas came to her mind.  She had a vision of being
turned out of the house, of her shame being proclaimed to all the
world.  She asked herself where she should go when she was turned
out of the house, and she could not find an answer.

When she thought of Vronsky, it seemed to her that he did not
love her, that he was already beginning to be tired of her, that
she could not offer herself to him, and she felt bitter against
him for it.  It seemed to her that the words that she had spoken
to her husband, and had continually repeated in her imagination,
she had said to everyone, and everyone had heard them.  She could
not bring herself to look those of her own household in the face.
She could not bring herself to call her maid, and still less go
downstairs and see her son and his governess.

The maid, who had been listening at her door for a long while,
came into her room of her own accord.  Anna glanced inquiringly
into her face, and blushed with a scared look.  The maid begged
her pardon for coming in, saying that she had fancied the bell
rang.  She brought her clothes and a note.  The note was from
Betsy.  Betsy reminded her that Liza Merkalova and Baroness
Shtoltz were coming to play croquet with her that morning with
their adorers, Kaluzhsky and old Stremov.  "Come, if only as a
study in morals.  I shall expect you," she finished.

Anna read the note and heaved a deep sigh.

"Nothing, I need nothing," she said to Annushka, who was
rearranging the bottles and brushes on the dressing table.  "You
can go.  I'll dress at once and come down.  I need nothing."

Annushka went out, but Anna did not begin dressing, and sat in
the same position, her head and hands hanging listlessly, and
every now and then she shivered all over, seemed as though she
would make some gesture, utter some word, and sank back into
lifelessness again.  She repeated continually, "My God! my God!"
But neither "God" nor "my" had any meaning to her.  The idea of
seeking help in her difficulty in religion was as remote from her
as seeking help from Alexey Alexandrovitch himself, although she
had never had doubts of the faith in which she had been brought
up.  She knew that the support of religion was possible only upon
condition of renouncing what made up for her the whole meaning of
life.  She was not simply miserable, she began to feel alarm at
the new spiritual condition, never experienced before, in which
she found herself.  She felt as though everything were beginning
to be double in her soul, just as objects sometimes appear double
to over-tired eyes.  She hardly knew at times what it was she
feared, and what she hoped for.  Whether she feared or desired
what had happened, or what was going to happen, and exactly what
she longed for, she could not have said.

"Ah, what am I doing!" she said to herself, feeling a sudden
thrill of pain in both sides of her head.  When she came to
herself, she saw that she was holding her hair in both hands,
each side of her temples, and pulling it.  She jumped up, and
began walking about.

"The coffee is ready, and mademoiselle and Seryozha are waiting,"
said Annushka, coming back again and finding Anna in the same
position.

"Seryozha? What about Seryozha?" Anna asked, with sudden
eagerness, recollecting her son's existence for the first time
that morning.

"He's been naughty, I think," answered Annushka with a smile.

"In what way?"

"Some peaches were lying on the table in the corner room.  I
think he slipped in and ate one of them on the sly."

The recollection of her son suddenly roused Anna from the
helpless condition in which she found herself.  She recalled the
partly sincere, though greatly exaggerated, rôle of the mother
living for her child, which she had taken up of late years, and
she felt with joy that in the plight in which she found herself
she had a support, quite apart from her relation to her husband
or to Vronsky.  This support was her son.  In whatever position
she might be placed, she could not lose her son.  Her husband
might put her to shame and turn her out, Vronsky might grow cold
to her and go on living his own life apart (she thought of him
again with bitterness and reproach); she could not leave her son.
She had an aim in life.  And she must act; act to secure this
relation to her son, so that he might not be taken from her.
Quickly indeed, as quickly as possible, she must take action
before he was taken from her.  She must take her son and go away.
Here was the one thing she had to do now.  She needed
consolation.  She must be calm, and get out of this insufferable
position.  The thought of immediate action binding her to her
son, of going away somewhere with him, gave her this consolation.

She dressed quickly, went downstairs, and with resolute steps
walked into the drawing room, where she found, as usual, waiting
for her, the coffee, Seryozha, and his governess.  Seryozha, all
in white, with his back and head bent, was standing at a table
under a looking-glass, and with an expression of intense
concentration which she knew well, and in which he resembled his
father, he was doing something to the flowers he carried.

The governess had a particularly severe expression.  Seryozha
screamed shrilly, as he often did, "Ah, mamma!" and stopped,
hesitating whether to go to greet his mother and put down the
flowers, or to finish making the wreath and go with the flowers.

The governess, after saying good-morning, began a long and
detailed account of Seryozha's naughtiness, but Anna did not hear
her; she was considering whether she would take her with her or
not.  "No, I won't take her," she decided.  "I'll go alone with
my child."

"Yes, it's very wrong," said Anna, and taking her son by the
shoulder she looked at him, not severely, but with a timid glance
that bewildered and delighted the boy, and she kissed him.
"Leave him to me," she said to the astonished governess, and not
letting go of her son, she sat down at the table, where coffee
was set ready for her.

"Mamma!  I...I...didn't..." he said, trying to make out from her
expression what was in store for him in regard to the peaches.

"Seryozha," she said, as soon as the governess had left the room,
"that was wrong, but you'll never do it again, will you?...  You
love me?"

She felt that the tears were coming into her eyes.  "Can I help
loving him?" she said to herself, looking deeply into his scared
and at the same time delighted eyes.  "And can he ever join his
father in punishing me?  Is it possible he will not feel for me?"
Tears were already flowing down her face, and to hide them she
got up abruptly and almost ran out on to the terrace.

After the thunder showers of the last few days, cold, bright
weather had set in.  The air was cold in the bright sun that
filtered through the freshly washed leaves.

She shivered, both from the cold and from the inward horror which
had clutched her with fresh force in the open air.

"Run along, run along to Mariette," she said to Seryozha, who had
followed her out, and she began walking up and down on the straw
matting of the terrace.  "Can it be that they won't forgive me,
won't understand how it all couldn't be helped?" she said to
herself.

Standing still, and looking at the tops of the aspen trees waving
in the wind, with their freshly washed, brightly shining leaves
in the cold sunshine, she knew that they would not forgive her,
that everyone and everything would be merciless to her now as
was that sky, that green.  And again she felt that everything was
split in two in her soul.  "I mustn't, mustn't think," she said
to herself.  "I must get ready.  To go where?  When?  Whom to
take with me?  Yes, to Moscow by the evening train.  Annushka and
Seryozha, and only the most necessary things.  But first I must
write to them both."  She went quickly indoors into her boudoir,
sat down at the table, and wrote to her husband:--"After what
has happened, I cannot remain any longer in your house.  I am
going away, and taking my son with me.  I don't know the law, and
so I don't know with which of the parents the son should remain;
but I take him with me because I cannot live without him.  Be
generous, leave him to me."

Up to this point she wrote rapidly and naturally, but the appeal
to his generosity, a quality she did not recognize in him, and
the necessity of winding up the letter with something touching,
pulled her up.  "Of my fault and my remorse I cannot speak,
because..."

She stopped again, finding no connection in her ideas. "No," she
said to herself, "there's no need of anything," and tearing up
the letter, she wrote it again, leaving out the allusion to
generosity, and sealed it up.

Another letter had to be written to Vronsky.  "I have told my
husband," she wrote, and she sat a long while unable to write
more.  It was so coarse, so unfeminine.  "And what more am I to
write to him?" she said to herself.  Again a flush of shame spread
over her face; she recalled his composure, and a feeling of anger
against him impelled her to tear the sheet with the phrase she
had written into tiny bits.  "No need of anything," she said to
herself, and closing her blotting-case she went upstairs, told
the governess and the servants that she was going that day to
Moscow, and at once set to work to pack up her things.



Chapter 16


All the rooms of the summer villa were full of porters,
gardeners, and footmen going to and fro carrying out things.
Cupboards and chests were open; twice they had sent to the shop
for cord; pieces of newspaper were tossing about on the floor.
Two trunks, some bags and strapped-up rugs, had been carried down
into the hall.  The carriage and two hired cabs were waiting at
the steps.  Anna, forgetting her inward agitation in the work of
packing, was standing at a table in her boudoir, packing her
traveling bag, when Annushka called her attention to the rattle
of some carriage driving up.  Anna looked out of the window and
saw Alexey Alexandrovitch's courier on the steps, ringing at the
front door bell.

"Run and find out what it is," she said, and with a calm sense of
being prepared for anything, she sat down in a low chair, folding
her hands on her knees.  A footman brought in a thick packet
directed in Alexey Alexandrovitch's hand.

"The courier has orders to wait for an answer," he said.

"Very well," she said, and as soon as he had left the room she
tore open the letter with trembling fingers.  A roll of unfolded
notes done up in a wrapper fell out of it.  She disengaged the
letter and began reading it at the end.  "Preparations shall be
made for your arrival here...I attach particular significance to
compliance..." she read.  She ran on, then back, read it all
through, and once more read the letter all through again from the
beginning.  When she had finished, she felt that she was cold all
over, and that a fearful calamity, such as she had not expected,
had burst upon her.

In the morning she had regretted that she had spoken to her
husband, and wished for nothing so much as that those words could
be unspoken.  And here this letter regarded them as unspoken, and
gave her what she had wanted.  But now this letter seemed to her
more awful than anything she had been able to conceive.

"He's right!" she said; "of course, he's always right; he's a
Christian, he's generous!  Yes, vile, base creature!  And no one
understands it except me, and no one ever will; and I can't
explain it.  They say he's so religious, so high-principled, so
upright, so clever; but they don't see what I've seen.  They
don't know how he has crushed my life for eight years, crushed
everything that was living in me--he has not once even thought
that I'm a live woman who must have love.  They don't know how at
every step he's humiliated me, and been just as pleased with
himself.  Haven't I striven, striven with all my strength, to
find something to give meaning to my life?  Haven't I struggled
to love him, to love my son when I could not love my husband?
But the time came when I knew that I couldn't cheat myself any
longer, that I was alive, that I was not to blame, that God has
made me so that I must love and live.  And now what does he do?
If he'd killed me, if he'd killed him, I could have borne
anything, I could have forgiven anything; but, no, he....  How
was it I didn't guess what he would do?  He's doing just what's
characteristic of his mean character.  He'll keep himself in the
right, while me, in my ruin, he'll drive still lower to worse
ruin yet..."

She recalled the words from the letter.  "You can conjecture what
awaits you and your son...."  "That's a threat to take away my
child, and most likely by their stupid law he can.  But I know
very well why he says it.  He doesn't believe even in my love for
my child, or he despises it (just as he always used to ridicule
it).  He despises that feeling in me, but he knows that I won't
abandon my child, that I can't abandon my child, that there
could be no life for me without my child, even with him whom I
love; but that if I abandoned my child and ran away from him, I
should be acting like the most infamous, basest of women.  He
knows that, and knows that I am incapable of doing that."

She recalled another sentence in the letter.  "Our life must go
on as it has done in the past...."  "That life was miserable
enough in the old days; it has been awful of late.  What will it
be now?  And he knows all that; he knows that I can't repent that
I breathe, that I love; he knows that it can lead to nothing but
lying and deceit; but he wants to go on torturing me.  I know
him; I know that he's at home and is happy in deceit, like a fish
swimming in the water.  No, I won't give him that happiness.
I'll break through the spiderweb of lies in which he wants to
catch me, come what may.  Anything's better than lying and
deceit.

"But how?  My God! my God!  Was ever a woman so miserable as I
am?..."

"No; I will break through it, I will break through it!" she
cried, jumping up and keeping back her tears.  And she went to
the writing table to write him another letter.  But at the bottom
of her heart she felt that she was not strong enough to break
through anything, that she was not strong enough to get out of
her old position, however false and dishonorable it might be.

She sat down at the writing table, but instead of writing she
clasped her hands on the table, and, laying her head on them,
burst into tears, with sobs and heaving breast like a child
crying.  She was weeping that her dream of her position being
made clear and definite had been annihilated forever.  She knew
beforehand that everything would go on in the old way, and far
worse, indeed, than in the old way.  She felt that the position
in the world that she enjoyed, and that had seemed to her of so
little consequence in the morning, that this position was
precious to her, that she would not have the strength to exchange
it for the shameful position of a woman who has abandoned husband
and child to join her lover; that however much she might
struggle, she could not be stronger than herself.  She would
never know freedom in love, but would remain forever a guilty
wife, with the menace of detection hanging over her at every
instant; deceiving her husband for the sake of a shameful
connection with a man living apart and away from her, whose life
she could never share.  She knew that this was how it would be,
and at the same time it was so awful that she could not even
conceive what it would end in.  And she cried without restraint,
as children cry when they are punished.

The sound of the footman's steps forced her to rouse herself,
and, hiding her face from him, she pretended to be writing.

"The courier asks if there's an answer," the footman announced.

"An answer?  Yes," said Anna.  "Let him wait.  I'll ring."

"What can I write?" she thought.  "What can I decide upon
alone?  What do I know?  What do I want?  What is there I care
for?"  Again she felt that her soul was beginning to be split in
two.  She was terrified again at this feeling, and clutched at
the first pretext for doing something which might divert her
thoughts from herself.  "I ought to see Alexey" (so she called
Vronsky in her thoughts); "no one but he can tell me what I ought
to do.  I'll go to Betsy's, perhaps I shall see him there," she
said to herself, completely forgetting that when she had told him
the day before that she was not going to Princess Tverskaya's, he
had said that in that case he should not go either.  She went up
to the table, wrote to her husband, "I have received your letter.
--A."; and, ringing the bell, gave it to the footman.

"We are not going," she said to Annushka, as she came in.

"Not going at all?"

"No; don't unpack till tomorrow, and let the carriage wait.  I'm
going to the princess's."

"Which dress am I to get ready?"



Chapter 17


The croquet party to which the Princess Tverskaya had invited
Anna was to consist of two ladies and their adorers.  These two
ladies were the chief representatives of a select new Petersburg
circle, nicknamed, in imitation of some imitation, _les sept
merveilles du monde_.  These ladies belonged to a circle which,
though of the highest society, was utterly hostile to that in
which Anna moved.  Moreover, Stremov, one of the most influential
people in Petersburg, and the elderly admirer of Liza Merkalova,
was Alexey Alexandrovitch's enemy in the political world.  From
all these considerations Anna had not meant to go, and the hints
in Princess Tverskaya's note referred to her refusal.  But now
Anna was eager to go, in the hope of seeing Vronsky.

Anna arrived at Princess Tverskaya's earlier than the other
guests.

At the same moment as she entered, Vronsky's footman, with
side-whiskers combed out like a _Kammerjunker_, went in too.
He stopped at the door, and, taking off his cap, let her pass.
Anna recognized him, and only then recalled that Vronsky had
told her the day before that he would not come.  Most likely
he was sending a note to say so.

As she took off her outer garment in the hall, she heard the
footman, pronouncing his "r's" even like a _Kammerjunker_, say,
"From the count for the princess," and hand the note.

She longed to question him as to where his master was.  She
longed to turn back and send him a letter to come and see her, or
to go herself to see him.  But neither the first nor the second
nor the third course was possible.  Already she heard bells
ringing to announce her arrival ahead of her, and Princess
Tverskaya's footman was standing at the open door waiting for her
to go forward into the inner rooms.

"The princess is in the garden; they will inform her immediately.
Would you be pleased to walk into the garden?" announced another
footman in another room.

The position of uncertainty, of indecision, was still the same as
at home--worse, in fact, since it was impossible to take any
step, impossible to see Vronsky, and she had to remain here among
outsiders, in company so uncongenial to her present mood.  But
she was wearing a dress that she knew suited her.  She was not
alone; all around was that luxurious setting of idleness that she
was used to, and she felt less wretched than at home.  She was
not forced to think what she was to do.  Everything would be done
of itself.  On meeting Betsy coming towards her in a white gown
that struck her by its elegance, Anna smiled at her just as she
always did.  Princess Tverskaya was walking with Tushkevitch and
a young lady, a relation, who, to the great joy of her parents in
the provinces, was spending the summer with the fashionable
princess.

There was probably something unusual about Anna, for Betsy
noticed it at once.

"I slept badly," answered Anna, looking intently at the footman
who came to meet them, and, as she supposed, brought Vronsky's
note.

"How glad I am you've come!" said Betsy.  "I'm tired, and was
just longing to have some tea before they come.  You might go"--
she turned to Tushkevitch--"with Masha, and try the croquet
ground over there where they've been cutting it.  We shall have
time to talk a little over tea; we'll have a cozy chat, eh?" she
said in English to Anna, with a smile, pressing the hand with
which she held a parasol.

"Yes, especially as I can't stay very long with you.  I'm forced
to go on to old Madame Vrede.  I've been promising to go for a
century," said Anna, to whom lying, alien as it was to her
nature, had become not merely simple and natural in society, but
a positive source of satisfaction.  Why she said this, which she
had not thought of a second before, she could not have explained.
She had said it simply from the reflection that as Vronsky would
not be here, she had better secure her own freedom, and try to
see him somehow.  But why she had spoken of old Madame Vrede,
whom she had to go and see, as she had to see many other people,
she could not have explained; and yet, as it afterwards turned
out, had she contrived the most cunning devices to meet Vronsky,
she could have thought of nothing better.

"No.  I'm not going to let you go for anything," answered Betsy,
looking intently into Anna's face.  "Really, if I were not fond
of you, I should feel offended.  One would think you were afraid
my society would compromise you.  Tea in the little dining room,
please," she said, half closing her eyes, as she always did when
addressing the footman.

Taking the note from him, she read it.

"Alexey's playing us false," she said in French; "he writes that
he can't come," she added in a tone as simple and natural as
though it could never enter her head that Vronsky could mean
anything more to Anna than a game of croquet.  Anna knew that
Betsy knew everything, but, hearing how she spoke of Vronsky
before her, she almost felt persuaded for a minute that she knew
nothing.

"Ah!" said Anna indifferently, as though not greatly interested
in the matter, and she went on smiling: "How can you or your
friends compromise anyone?"

This playing with words, this hiding of a secret, had a great
fascination for Anna, as, indeed, it has for all women.  And it
was not the necessity of concealment, not the aim with which the
concealment was contrived, but the process of concealment itself
which attracted her.

"I can't be more Catholic than the Pope," she said.  "Stremov
and Liza Merkalova, why, they're the cream of the cream of
society.  Besides, they're received everywhere, and _I_"--she
laid special stress on the I--"have never been strict and
intolerant.  It's simply that I haven't the time."

"No; you don't care, perhaps, to meet Stremov?  Let him and
Alexey Alexandrovitch tilt at each other in the committee--
that's no affair of ours.  But in the world, he's the most
amiable man I know, and a devoted croquet player.  You shall see.
And, in spite of his absurd position as Liza's lovesick swain at
his age, you ought to see how he carries off the absurd position.
He's very nice.  Sappho Shtoltz you don't know?  Oh, that's a new
type, quite new."

Betsy said all this, and, at the same time, from her
good-humored, shrewd glance, Anna felt that she partly guessed
her plight, and was hatching something for her benefit.  They
were in the little boudoir.

"I must write to Alexey though," and Betsy sat down to the
table, scribbled a few lines, and put the note in an envelope.

"I'm telling him to come to dinner.  I've one lady extra to
dinner with me, and no man to take her in.  Look what I've said,
will that persuade him?  Excuse me, I must leave you for a
minute.  Would you seal it up, please, and send it off?" she said
from the door; "I have to give some directions."

Without a moment's thought, Anna sat down to the table with
Betsy's letter, and, without reading it, wrote below: "It's
essential for me to see you.  Come to the Vrede garden.  I shall
be there at six o'clock."  She sealed it up, and, Betsy coming
back, in her presence handed the note to be taken.

At tea, which was brought them on a little tea-table in the cool
little drawing room, the cozy chat promised by Princess Tverskaya
before the arrival of her visitors really did come off between
the two women.  They criticized the people they were expecting,
and the conversation fell upon Liza Merkalova.

"She's very sweet, and I always liked her," said Anna.

"You ought to like her.  She raves about you.  Yesterday she came
up to me after the races and was in despair at not finding you.
She says you're a real heroine of romance, and that if she were a
man she would do all sorts of mad things for your sake.  Stremov
says she does that as it is."

"But do tell me, please, I never could make it out," said Anna,
after being silent for some time, speaking in a tone that showed
she was not asking an idle question, but that what she was asking
was of more importance to her than it should have been; "do tell
me, please, what are her relations with Prince Kaluzhsky, Mishka,
as he's called? I've met them so little.  What does it mean?"

Betsy smiled with her eyes, and looked intently at Anna.

"It's a new manner," she said.  "They've all adopted that manner.
They've flung their caps over the windmills.  But there are ways
and ways of flinging them."

"Yes, but what are her relations precisely with Kaluzhsky?"

Betsy broke into unexpectedly mirthful and irrepressible
laughter, a thing which rarely happened with her.

"You're encroaching on Princess Myakaya's special domain now.
That's the question of an _enfant terrible_," and Betsy obviously
tried to restrain herself, but could not, and went off into peals
of that infectious laughter that people laugh who do not laugh
often.  "You'd better ask them," she brought out, between tears
of laughter.

"No; you laugh," said Anna, laughing too in spite of herself,
"but I never could understand it.  I can't understand the
husband's rôle in it."

"The husband?  Liza Merkalova's husband carries her shawl, and is
always ready to be of use.  But anything more than that in
reality, no one cares to inquire.  You know in decent society one
doesn't talk or think even of certain details of the toilet.
That's how it is with this."

"Will you be at Madame Rolandak's fête?" asked Anna, to change
the conversation.

"I don't think so," answered Betsy, and, without looking at her
friend, she began filling the little transparent cups with
fragrant tea.  Putting a cup before Anna, she took out a
cigarette, and, fitting it into a silver holder, she lighted it.

"It's like this, you see: I'm in a fortunate position," she
began, quite serious now, as she took up her cup.  "I understand
you, and I understand Liza.  Liza now is one of those naïve
natures that, like children, don't know what's good and what's
bad.  Anyway, she didn't comprehend it when she was very young.
And now she's aware that the lack of comprehension suits her.
Now, perhaps, she doesn't know on purpose," said Betsy, with a
subtle smile.  "But, anyway, it suits her.  The very same thing,
don't you see, may be looked at tragically, and turned into a
misery, or it may be looked at simply and even humorously.
Possibly you are inclined to look at things too tragically."

"How I should like to know other people just as I know myself!"
said Anna, seriously and dreamily.  "Am I worse than other
people, or better?  I think I'm worse."

"_Enfant terrible, enfant terrible!_" repeated Betsy.  "But here
they are."



Chapter 18


They heard the sound of steps and a man's voice, then a woman's
voice and laughter, and immediately thereafter there walked in
the expected guests: Sappho Shtoltz, and a young man beaming with
excess of health, the so-called Vaska.  It was evident that ample
supplies of beefsteak, truffles, and Burgundy never failed to
reach him at the fitting hour.  Vaska bowed to the two ladies,
and glanced at them, but only for one second.  He walked after
Sappho into the drawing-room, and followed her about as though he
were chained to her, keeping his sparkling eyes fixed on her as
though he wanted to eat her.  Sappho Shtoltz was a blonde beauty
with black eyes.  She walked with smart little steps in
high-heeled shoes, and shook hands with the ladies vigorously
like a man.

Anna had never met this new star of fashion, and was struck by
her beauty, the exaggerated extreme to which her dress was
carried, and the boldness of her manners.  On her head there was
such a superstructure of soft, golden hair--her own and false
mixed--that her head was equal in size to the elegantly rounded
bust, of which so much was exposed in front.  The impulsive
abruptness of her movements was such that at every step the lines
of her knees and the upper part of her legs were distinctly
marked under her dress, and the question involuntarily rose to
the mind where in the undulating, piled-up mountain of material
at the back the real body of the woman, so small and slender, so
naked in front, and so hidden behind and below, really came to an
end.

Betsy made haste to introduce her to Anna.

"Only fancy, we all but ran over two soldiers," she began telling
them at once, using her eyes, smiling and twitching away her
tail, which she flung back at one stroke all on one side.  "I
drove here with Vaska....  Ah, to be sure, you don't know each
other."  And mentioning his surname she introduced the young man,
and reddening a little, broke into a ringing laugh at her
mistake--that is, at her having called him Vaska to a stranger.
Vaska bowed once more to Anna, but he said nothing to her.  He
addressed Sappho: "You've lost your bet.  We got here first.  Pay
up," said he, smiling.

Sappho laughed still more festively.

"Not just now," said she.

"Oh, all right, I'll have it later."

"Very well, very well.  Oh, yes."  She turned suddenly to
Princess Betsy: "I am a nice person...I positively forgot it...
I've brought you a visitor.  And here he comes." The unexpected
young visitor, whom Sappho had invited, and whom she had
forgotten, was, however, a personage of such consequence that, in
spite of his youth, both the ladies rose on his entrance.

He was a new admirer of Sappho's.  He now dogged her footsteps,
like Vaska.

Soon after Prince Kaluzhsky arrived, and Liza Merkalova with
Stremov.  Liza Merkalova was a thin brunette, with an Oriental,
languid type of face, and--as everyone used to say--exquisite
enigmatic eyes.  The tone of her dark dress (Anna immediately
observed and appreciated the fact) was in perfect harmony with
her style of beauty.  Liza was as soft and enervated as Sappho
was smart and abrupt.

But to Anna's taste Liza was far more attractive.  Betsy had said
to Anna that she had adopted the pose of an innocent child, but
when Anna saw her, she felt that this was not the truth.  She
really was both innocent and corrupt, but a sweet and passive
woman.  It is true that her tone was the same as Sappho's; that
like Sappho, she had two men, one young and one old, tacked onto
her, and devouring her with their eyes.  But there was something
in her higher than what surrounded her.  There was in her the
glow of the real diamond among glass imitations.  This glow shone
out in her exquisite, truly enigmatic eyes.  The weary, and at
the same time passionate, glance of those eyes, encircled by dark
rings, impressed one by its perfect sincerity.  Everyone looking
into those eyes fancied he knew her wholly, and knowing her,
could not but love her.  At the sight of Anna, her whole face
lighted up at once with a smile of delight.

"Ah, how glad I am to see you!" she said, going up to her.
"Yesterday at the races all I wanted was to get to you, but
you'd gone away.  I did so want to see you, yesterday especially.
Wasn't it awful?" she said, looking at Anna with eyes that seemed
to lay bare all her soul.

"Yes; I had no idea it would be so thrilling," said Anna,
blushing.

The company got up at this moment to go into the garden.

"I'm not going," said Liza, smiling and settling herself close to
Anna.  "You won't go either, will you?  Who wants to play
croquet?"

"Oh, I like it," said Anna.

"There, how do you manage never to be bored by things?  It's
delightful to look at you.  You're alive, but I'm bored."

"How can you be bored?  Why, you live in the liveliest set in
Petersburg," said Anna.

"Possibly the people who are not of our set are even more bored;
but we--I certainly--are not happy, but awfully, awfully
bored."

Sappho smoking a cigarette went off into the garden with the two
young men.  Betsy and Stremov remained at the tea-table.

"What, bored!" said Betsy.  "Sappho says they did enjoy
themselves tremendously at your house last night."

"Ah, how dreary it all was!" said Liza Merkalova.  "We all drove
back to my place after the races.  And always the same people,
always the same.  Always the same thing.  We lounged about on
sofas all the evening.  What is there to enjoy in that?  No; do
tell me how you manage never to be bored?" she said, addressing
Anna again.  "One has but to look at you and one sees, here's a
woman who may be happy or unhappy, but isn't bored.  Tell me how
you do it?"

"I do nothing," answered Anna, blushing at these searching
questions.

"That's the best way," Stremov put in.  Stremov was a man of
fifty, partly gray, but still vigorous-looking, very ugly, but
with a characteristic and intelligent face.  Liza Merkalova was
his wife's niece, and he spent all his leisure hours with her.
On meeting Anna Karenina, as he was Alexey Alexandrovitch's enemy
in the government, he tried, like a shrewd man and a man of the
world, to be particularly cordial with her, the wife of his
enemy.

"'Nothing,'" he put in with a subtle smile, "that's the very best
way.  I told you long ago," he said, turning to Liza Merkalova,
"that if you don't want to be bored, you mustn't think you're
going to be bored.  It's just as you mustn't be afraid of not
being able to fall asleep, if you're afraid of sleeplessness.
That's just what Anna Arkadyevna has just said."

"I should be very glad if I had said it, for it's not only
clever but true," said Anna, smiling.

"No, do tell me why it is one can't go to sleep, and one can't
help being bored?"

"To sleep well one ought to work, and to enjoy oneself one ought
to work too."

"What am I to work for when my work is no use to anybody?  And I
can't and won't knowingly make a pretense about it."

"You're incorrigible," said Stremov, not looking at her, and he
spoke again to Anna.  As he rarely met Anna, he could say nothing
but commonplaces to her, but he said those commonplaces as to
when she was returning to Petersburg, and how fond Countess Lidia
Ivanovna was of her, with an expression which suggested that he
longed with his whole soul to please her and show his regard for
her and even more than that.

Tushkevitch came in, announcing that the party were awaiting the
other players to begin croquet.

"No, don't go away, please don't," pleaded Liza Merkalova,
hearing that Anna was going.  Stremov joined in her entreaties.

"It's too violent a transition," he said, "to go from such
company to old Madame Vrede.  And besides, you will only give her
a chance for talking scandal, while here you arouse none but such
different feelings of the highest and most opposite kind," he
said to her.

Anna pondered for an instant in uncertainty.  This shrewd man's
flattering words, the naïve, childlike affection shown her by
Liza Merkalova, and all the social atmosphere she was used to,--
it was all so easy, and what was in store for her was so
difficult, that she was for a minute in uncertainty whether to
remain, whether to put off a little longer the painful moment of
explanation.  But remembering what was in store for her alone at
home, if she did not come to some decision, remembering that
gesture--terrible even in memory--when she had clutched her
hair in both hands--she said good-bye and went away.



Chapter 19


In spite of Vronsky's apparently frivolous life in society, he
was a man who hated irregularity.  In early youth in the Corps of
Pages, he had experienced the humiliation of a refusal, when he
had tried, being in difficulties, to borrow money, and since then
he had never once put himself in the same position again.

In order to keep his affairs in some sort of order, he used about
five times a year (more or less frequently, according to
circumstances) to shut himself up alone and put all his affairs
into definite shape.  This he used to call his day of reckoning
or _faire la lessive_.

On waking up the day after the races, Vronsky put on a white
linen coat, and without shaving or taking his bath, he
distributed about the table moneys, bills, and letters, and set
to work.  Petritsky, who knew he was ill-tempered on such
occasions, on waking up and seeing his comrade at the
writing-table, quietly dressed and went out without getting in
his way.

Every man who knows to the minutest details all the complexity of
the conditions surrounding him, cannot help imagining that the
complexity of these conditions, and the difficulty of making them
clear, is something exceptional and personal, peculiar to
himself, and never supposes that others are surrounded by just as
complicated an array of personal affairs as he is.  So indeed it
seemed to Vronsky.  And not without inward pride, and not
without reason, he thought that any other man would long ago have
been in difficulties, would have been forced to some dishonorable
course, if he had found himself in such a difficult position.
But Vronsky felt that now especially it was essential for him to
clear up and define his position if he were to avoid getting into
difficulties.

What Vronsky attacked first as being the easiest was his
pecuniary position.  Writing out on note paper in his minute hand
all that he owed, he added up the amount and found that his debts
amounted to seventeen thousand and some odd hundreds, which he
left out for the sake of clearness.  Reckoning up his money and
his bank book, he found that he had left one thousand eight
hundred roubles, and nothing coming in before the New Year.
Reckoning over again his list of debts, Vronsky copied it,
dividing it into three classes.  In the first class he put the
debts which he would have to pay at once, or for which he must in
any case have the money ready so that on demand for payment there
could not be a moment's delay in paying.  Such debts amounted to
about four thousand: one thousand five hundred for a horse, and
two thousand five hundred as surety for a young comrade,
Venovsky, who had lost that sum to a cardsharper in Vronsky's
presence.  Vronsky had wanted to pay the money at the time (he
had that amount then), but Venovsky and Yashvin had insisted that
they would pay and not Vronsky, who had not played.  That was so
far well, but Vronsky knew that in this dirty business, though
his only share in it was undertaking by word of mouth to be
surety for Venovsky, it was absolutely necessary for him to have
the two thousand five hundred roubles so as to be able to fling
it at the swindler, and have no more words with him.  And so for
this first and most important division he must have four thousand
roubles.  The second class--eight thousand roubles--consisted
of less important debts.  These were principally accounts owing
in connection with his race horses, to the purveyor of oats and
hay, the English saddler, and so on.  He would have to pay some
two thousand roubles on these debts too, in order to be quite
free from anxiety.  The last class of debts--to shops, to
hotels, to his tailor--were such as need not be considered.  So
that he needed at least six thousand roubles for current
expenses, and he only had one thousand eight hundred.  For a man
with one hundred thousand roubles of revenue, which was what
everyone fixed as Vronsky's income, such debts, one would
suppose, could hardly be embarrassing; but the fact was that he
was far from having one hundred thousand.  His father's immense
property, which alone yielded a yearly income of two hundred
thousand, was left undivided between the brothers.  At the time
when the elder brother, with a mass of debts, married Princess
Varya Tchirkova, the daughter of a Decembrist without any fortune
whatever, Alexey had given up to his elder brother almost the
whole income from his father's estate, reserving for himself only
twenty-five thousand a year from it.  Alexey had said at the time
to his brother that that sum would be sufficient for him until he
married, which he probably never would do.  And his brother, who
was in command of one of the most expensive regiments, and was
only just married, could not decline the gift.  His mother, who
had her own separate property, had allowed Alexey every year
twenty thousand in addition to the twenty-five thousand he had
reserved, and Alexey had spent it all.  Of late his mother,
incensed with him on account of his love affair and his leaving
Moscow, had given up sending him the money.  And in consequence
of this, Vronsky, who had been in the habit of living on the
scale of forty-five thousand a year, having only received twenty
thousand that year, found himself now in difficulties.  To get
out of these difficulties, he could not apply to his mother for
money.  Her last letter, which he had received the day before,
had particularly exasperated him by the hints in it that she was
quite ready to help him to succeed in the world and in the army,
but not to lead a life which was a scandal to all good society.
His mother's attempt to buy him stung him to the quick and made
him feel colder than ever to her.  But he could not draw back
from the generous word when it was once uttered, even though he
felt now, vaguely foreseeing certain eventualities in his
intrigue with Madame Karenina, that this generous word had been
spoken thoughtlessly, and that even though he were not married he
might need all the hundred thousand of income.  But it was
impossible to draw back.  He had only to recall his brother's
wife, to remember how that sweet, delightful Varya sought, at
every convenient opportunity, to remind him that she remembered
his generosity and appreciated it, to grasp the impossibility of
taking back his gift.  It was as impossible as beating a woman,
stealing, or lying.  One thing only could and ought to be done,
and Vronsky determined upon it without an instant's hesitation:
to borrow money from a money-lender, ten thousand roubles, a
proceeding which presented no difficulty, to cut down his
expenses generally, and to sell his race horses.  Resolving on
this, he promptly wrote a note to Rolandak, who had more than
once sent to him with offers to buy horses from him.  Then he
sent for the Englishman and the money-lender, and divided what
money he had according to the accounts he intended to pay.
Having finished this business, he wrote a cold and cutting answer
to his mother.  Then he took out of his notebook three notes of
Anna's, read them again, burned them, and remembering their
conversation on the previous day, he sank into meditation.



Chapter 20


Vronsky's life was particularly happy in that he had a code of
principles, which defined with unfailing certitude what he ought
and what he ought not to do.  This code of principles covered
only a very small circle of contingencies, but then the
principles were never doubtful, and Vronsky, as he never went
outside that circle, had never had a moment's hesitation about
doing what he ought to do.  These principles laid down as
invariable rules: that one must pay a cardsharper, but need not
pay a tailor; that one must never tell a lie to a man, but one
may to a woman; that one must never cheat anyone, but one may a
husband; that one must never pardon an insult, but one may give
one and so on.  These principles were possibly not reasonable and
not good, but they were of unfailing certainty, and so long as he
adhered to them, Vronsky felt that his heart was at peace and he
could hold his head up.  Only quite lately in regard to his
relations with Anna, Vronsky had begun to feel that his code of
principles did not fully cover all possible contingencies, and to
foresee in the future difficulties and perplexities for which he
could find no guiding clue.

His present relation to Anna and to her husband was to his mind
clear and simple.  It was clearly and precisely defined in the
code of principles by which he was guided.

She was an honorable woman who had bestowed her love upon him,
and he loved her, and therefore she was in his eyes a woman who
had a right to the same, or even more, respect than a lawful
wife.  He would have had his hand chopped off before he would
have allowed himself by a word, by a hint, to humiliate her, or
even to fall short of the fullest respect a woman could look for.

His attitude to society, too, was clear.  Everyone might know,
might suspect it, but no one might dare to speak of it.  If any
did so, he was ready to force all who might speak to be silent
and to respect the non-existent honor of the woman he loved.

His attitude to the husband was the clearest of all.  From the
moment that Anna loved Vronsky, he had regarded his own right
over her as the one thing unassailable.  Her husband was simply a
superfluous and tiresome person.  No doubt he was in a pitiable
position, but how could that be helped?  The one thing the
husband had a right to was to demand satisfaction with a weapon
in his hand, and Vronsky was prepared for this at any minute.

But of late new inner relations had arisen between him and her,
which frightened Vronsky by their indefiniteness.  Only the day
before she had told him that she was with child.  And he felt
that this fact and what she expected of him called for something
not fully defined in that code of principles by which he had
hitherto steered his course in life.  And he had been indeed
caught unawares, and at the first moment when she spoke to him of
her position, his heart had prompted him to beg her to leave her
husband.  He had said that, but now thinking things over he saw
clearly that it would be better to manage to avoid that; and at
the same time, as he told himself so, he was afraid whether it
was not wrong.

"If I told her to leave her husband, that must mean uniting her
life with mine; am I prepared for that?  How can I take her away
now, when I have no money?  Supposing I could arrange....  But
how can I take her away while I'm in the service? If I say
that--I ought to be prepared to do it, that is, I ought to have
the money and to retire from the army."

And he grew thoughtful.  The question whether to retire from the
service or not brought him to the other and perhaps the chief
though hidden interest of his life, of which none knew but he.

Ambition was the old dream of his youth and childhood, a dream
which he did not confess even to himself, though it was so
strong that now this passion was even doing battle with his love.
His first steps in the world and in the service had been
successful, but two years before he had made a great mistake.
Anxious to show his independence and to advance, he had refused a
post that had been offered him, hoping that this refusal would
heighten his value; but it turned out that he had been too bold,
and he was passed over.  And having, whether he liked or not,
taken up for himself the position of an independent man, he
carried it off with great tact and good sense, behaving as though
he bore no grudge against anyone, did not regard himself as
injured in any way, and cared for nothing but to be left alone
since he was enjoying himself.  In reality he had ceased to enjoy
himself as long ago as the year before, when he went away to
Moscow.  He felt that this independent attitude of a man who
might have done anything, but cared to do nothing, was already
beginning to pall, that many people were beginning to fancy that
he was not really capable of anything but being a
straightforward, good-natured fellow.  His connection with Madame
Karenina, by creating so much sensation and attracting general
attention, had given him a fresh distinction which soothed his
gnawing worm of ambition for a while, but a week before that worm
had been roused up again with fresh force.  The friend of his
childhood, a man of the same set, of the same coterie, his
comrade in the Corps of Pages, Serpuhovskoy, who had left school
with him and had been his rival in class, in gymnastics, in their
scrapes and their dreams of glory, had come back a few days
before from Central Asia, where he had gained two steps up in
rank, and an order rarely bestowed upon generals so young.

As soon as he arrived in Petersburg, people began to talk about
him as a newly risen star of the first magnitude.  A schoolfellow
of Vronsky's and of the same age, he was a general and was
expecting a command, which might have influence on the course of
political events; while Vronsky, independent and brilliant and
beloved by a charming woman though he was, was simply a cavalry
captain who was readily allowed to be as independent as ever he
liked.  "Of course I don't envy Serpuhovskoy and never could
envy him; but his advancement shows me that one has only to watch
one's opportunity, and the career of a man like me may be very
rapidly made.  Three years ago he was in just the same position
as I am.  If I retire, I burn my ships.  If I remain in the army,
I lose nothing.  She said herself she did not wish to change her
position.  And with her love I cannot feel envious of
Serpuhovskoy."  And slowly twirling his mustaches, he got up from
the table and walked about the room.  His eyes shone particularly
brightly, and he felt in that confident, calm, and happy frame of
mind which always came after he had thoroughly faced his
position.  Everything was straight and clear, just as after
former days of reckoning.  He shaved, took a cold bath, dressed
and went out.



Chapter 21


"We've come to fetch you.  Your _lessive_ lasted a good time
today," said Petritsky.  "Well, is it over?"

"It is over," answered Vronsky, smiling with his eyes only, and
twirling the tips of his mustaches as circumspectly as though
after the perfect order into which his affairs had been brought
any over-bold or rapid movement might disturb it.

"You're always just as if you'd come out of a bath after it,"
said Petritsky.  "I've come from Gritsky's" (that was what they
called the colonel); "they're expecting you."

Vronsky, without answering, looked at his comrade, thinking of
something else.

"Yes; is that music at his place?" he said, listening to the
familiar sounds of polkas and waltzes floating across to him.
"What's the fête?"

"Serpuhovskoy's come."

"Aha!" said Vronsky, "why, I didn't know."

The smile in his eyes gleamed more brightly than ever.

Having once made up his mind that he was happy in his love, that
he sacrificed his ambition to it--having anyway taken up this
position, Vronsky was incapable of feeling either envious of
Serpuhovskoy or hurt with him for not coming first to him when he
came to the regiment.  Serpuhovskoy was a good friend, and he was
delighted he had come.

"Ah, I'm very glad!"

The colonel, Demin, had taken a large country house.  The whole
party were in the wide lower balcony.  In the courtyard the first
objects that met Vronsky's eyes were a band of singers in white
linen coats, standing near a barrel of vodka, and the robust,
good-humored figure of the colonel surrounded by officers.  He
had gone out as far as the first step of the balcony and was
loudly shouting across the band that played Offenbach's
quadrille, waving his arms and giving some orders to a few
soldiers standing on one side.  A group of soldiers, a
quartermaster, and several subalterns came up to the balcony with
Vronsky.  The colonel returned to the table, went out again onto
the steps with a tumbler in his hand, and proposed the toast, "To
the health of our former comrade, the gallant general, Prince
Serpuhovskoy.  Hurrah!"

The colonel was followed by Serpuhovskoy, who came out onto the
steps smiling, with a glass in his hand.

"You always get younger, Bondarenko," he said to the
rosy-checked, smart-looking quartermaster standing just before
him, still youngish looking though doing his second term of
service.

It was three years since Vronsky had seen Serpuhovskoy.  He
looked more robust, had let his whiskers grow, but was still the
same graceful creature, whose face and figure were even more
striking from their softness and nobility than their beauty.  The
only change Vronsky detected in him was that subdued, continual
radiance of beaming content which settles on the faces of men who
are successful and are sure of the recognition of their success
by everyone.  Vronsky knew that radiant air, and immediately
observed it in Serpuhovskoy.

As Serpuhovskoy came down the steps he saw Vronsky.  A smile of
pleasure lighted up his face.  He tossed his head upwards and
waved the glass in his hand, greeting Vronsky, and showing him by
the gesture that he could not come to him before the
quartermaster, who stood craning forward his lips ready to be
kissed.

"Here he is!" shouted the colonel.  "Yashvin told me you were in
one of your gloomy tempers."

Serpuhovskoy kissed the moist, fresh lips of the gallant-looking
quartermaster, and wiping his mouth with his handkerchief, went
up to Vronsky.

"How glad I am!" he said, squeezing his hand and drawing him on
one side.

"You look after him," the colonel shouted to Yashvin, pointing to
Vronsky; and he went down below to the soldiers.

"Why weren't you at the races yesterday?  I expected to see you
there," said Vronsky, scrutinizing Serpuhovskoy.

"I did go, but late.  I beg your pardon," he added, and he
turned to the adjutant: "Please have this divided from me, each
man as much as it runs to."  And he hurriedly took notes for
three hundred roubles from his pocketbook, blushing a little.

"Vronsky!  Have anything to eat or drink?" asked Yashvin.  "Hi,
something for the count to eat!  Ah, here it is: have a glass!"

The fête at the colonel's lasted a long while.  There was a great
deal of drinking.  They tossed Serpuhovskoy in the air and caught
him again several times.  Then they did the same to the colonel.
Then, to the accompaniment of the band, the colonel himself
danced with Petritsky.  Then the colonel, who began to show signs
of feebleness, sat down on a bench in the courtyard and began
demonstrating to Yashvin the superiority of Russia over Poland,
especially in cavalry attack, and there was a lull in the revelry
for a moment.  Serpuhovskoy went into the house to the bathroom
to wash his hands and found Vronsky there; Vronsky was drenching
his head with water.  He had taken off his coat and put his
sunburnt, hairy neck under the tap, and was rubbing it and his
head with his hands.  When he had finished, Vronsky sat down by
Serpuhovskoy.  They both sat down in the bathroom on a lounge,
and a conversation began which was very interesting to both of
them.

"I've always been hearing about you through my wife," said
Serpuhovskoy.  "I'm glad you've been seeing her pretty often."

"She's friendly with Varya, and they're the only women in
Petersburg I care about seeing," answered Vronsky, smiling.  He
smiled because he foresaw the topic the conversation would turn
on, and he was glad of it.

"The only ones?" Serpuhovskoy queried, smiling.

"Yes; and I heard news of you, but not only through your wife,"
said Vronsky, checking his hint by a stern expression of face.
"I was greatly delighted to hear of your success, but not a bit
surprised.  I expected even more."

Serpuhovskoy smiled.  Such an opinion of him was obviously
agreeable to him, and he did not think it necessary to conceal
it.

"Well, I on the contrary expected less--I'll own frankly.  But
I'm glad, very glad.  I'm ambitious; that's my weakness, and I
confess to it."

"Perhaps you wouldn't confess to it if you hadn't been
successful," said Vronsky.

"I don't suppose so," said Serpuhovskoy, smiling again.  "I
won't say life wouldn't be worth living without it, but it would
be dull.  Of course I may be mistaken, but I fancy I have a
certain capacity for the line I've chosen, and that power of any
sort in my hands, if it is to be, will be better than in the
hands of a good many people I know," said Serpuhovskoy, with
beaming consciousness of success; "and so the nearer I get to it,
the better pleased I am."

"Perhaps that is true for you, but not for everyone.  I used to
think so too, but here I live and think life worth living not
only for that."

"There it's out! here it comes!" said Serpuhovskoy, laughing.
"Ever since I heard about you, about your refusal, I began....
Of course, I approved of what you did.  But there are ways of
doing everything.  And I think your action was good in itself,
but you didn't do it quite in the way you ought to have done."

"What's done can't be undone, and you know I never go back on
what I've done.  And besides, I'm very well off."

"Very well off--for the time.  But you're not satisfied with
that.  I wouldn't say this to your brother.  He's a nice child,
like our host here.  There he goes!" he added, listening to the
roar of "hurrah!"--"and he's happy, but that does not satisfy
you."

"I didn't say it did satisfy me."

"Yes, but that's not the only thing.  Such men as you are
wanted."

"By whom?"

"By whom?  By society, by Russia.  Russia needs men; she needs a
party, or else everything goes and will go to the dogs."

"How do you mean?  Bertenev's party against the Russian
communists?"

"No," said Serpuhovskoy, frowning with vexation at being
suspected of such an absurdity.  "_Tout ça est une blague_.
That's always been and always will be.  There are no communists.
But intriguing people have to invent a noxious, dangerous party.
It's an old trick.  No, what's wanted is a powerful party of
independent men like you and me."

"But why so?" Vronsky mentioned a few men who were in power.
"Why aren't they independent men?"

"Simply because they have not, or have not had from birth, an
independent fortune; they've not had a name, they've not been
close to the sun and center as we have.  They can be bought
either by money or by favor.  And they have to find a support for
themselves in inventing a policy.  And they bring forward some
notion, some policy that they don't believe in, that does harm;
and the whole policy is really only a means to a government house
and so much income.  _Cela n'est pas plus fin que ça_, when you get
a peep at their cards.  I may be inferior to them, stupider
perhaps, though I don't see why I should be inferior to them.
But you and I have one important advantage over them for certain,
in being more difficult to buy.  And such men are more needed
than ever."

Vronsky listened attentively, but he was not so much interested
by the meaning of the words as by the attitude of Serpuhovskoy
who was already contemplating a struggle with the existing
powers, and already had his likes and dislikes in that higher
world, while his own interest in the governing world did not go
beyond the interests of his regiment.  Vronsky felt, too, how
powerful Serpuhovskoy might become through his unmistakable
faculty for thinking things out and for taking things in, through
his intelligence and gift of words, so rarely met with in the
world in which he moved.  And, ashamed as he was of the feeling,
he felt envious.

"Still I haven't the one thing of most importance for that," he
answered; "I haven't the desire for power.  I had it once, but
it's gone."

"Excuse me, that's not true," said Serpuhovskoy, smiling.

"Yes, it is true, it is true...now!" Vronsky added, to be
truthful.

"Yes, it's true now, that's another thing; but that _now_ won't
last forever."

"Perhaps," answered Vronsky.

"You say _perhaps_," Serpuhovskoy went on, as though guessing his
thoughts, "but I say _for certain_.  And that's what I wanted to
see you for.  Your action was just what it should have been.  I
see that, but you ought not to keep it up.  I only ask you to
give me carte blanche.  I'm not going to offer you my
protection...though, indeed, why shouldn't I protect you?--
you've protected me often enough!  I should hope our friendship
rises above all that sort of thing.  Yes," he said, smiling to
him as tenderly as a woman, "give me _carte blanche_, retire from
the regiment, and I'll draw you upwards imperceptibly."

"But you must understand that I want nothing," said Vronsky,
"except that all should be as it is."

Serpuhovskoy got up and stood facing him.

"You say that all should be as it is.  I understand what that
means.  But listen: we're the same age, you've known a greater
number of women perhaps than I have."  Serpohovskoy's smile and
gestures told Vronsky that he mustn't be afraid, that he would be
tender and careful in touching the sore place.  "But I'm married,
and believe me, in getting to know thoroughly one's wife, if one
loves her, as someone has said, one gets to know all women better
than if one knew thousands of them."

"We're coming directly!" Vronsky shouted to an officer, who
looked into the room and called them to the colonel.

Vronsky was longing now to hear to the end and know what
Serpuhovskey would say to him.

"And here's my opinion for you.  Women are the chief stumbling
block in a man's career.  It's hard to love a woman and do
anything.  There's only one way of having love conveniently
without its being a hindrance--that's marriage.  How, how am I
to tell you what I mean?" said Serpuhovskoy, who liked similes.
"Wait a minute, wait a minute!  Yes, just as you can only carry a
_fardeau_ and do something with your hands, when the fardeau is
tied on your back, and that's marriage.  And that's what I felt
when I was married.  My hands were suddenly set free.  But to
drag that _fardeau_ about with you without marriage, your hands
will always be so full that you can do nothing.  Look at
Mazankov, at Krupov.  They've ruined their careers for the sake
of women."

"What women!" said Vronsky, recalling the Frenchwoman and the
actress with whom the two men he had mentioned were connected.

"The firmer the woman's footing in society, the worse it is.
That's much the same as--not merely carrying the _fardeau_ in
your arms--but tearing it away from someone else."

"You have never loved," Vronsky said softly, looking straight
before him and thinking of Anna.

"Perhaps.  But you remember what I've said to you.  And another
thing, women are all more materialistic than men.  We make
something immense out of love, but they are always
_terre-à-terre_."

"Directly, directly!" he cried to a footman who came in.  But the
footman had not come to call them again, as he supposed.  The
footman brought Vronsky a note.

"A man brought it from Princess Tverskaya."

Vronsky opened the letter, and flushed crimson.

"My head's begun to ache; I'm going home," he said to
Serpuhovskoy.

"Oh, good-bye then.  You give me _carte blanche!_"

"We'll talk about it later on; I'll look you up in Petersburg."



Chapter 22


It was six o'clock already, and so, in order to be there quickly,
and at the same time not to drive with his own horses, known to
everyone, Vronsky got into Yashvin's hired fly, and told the
driver to drive as quickly as possible.  It was a roomy,
old-fashioned fly, with seats for four.  He sat in one corner,
stretched his legs out on the front seat, and sank into
meditation.

A vague sense of the order into which his affairs had been
brought, a vague recollection of the friendliness and flattery of
Serpuhovskoy, who had considered him a man that was needed, and
most of all, the anticipation of the interview before him--all
blended into a general, joyous sense of life.  This feeling was
so strong that he could not help smiling.  He dropped his legs,
crossed one leg over the other knee, and taking it in his hand,
felt the springy muscle of the calf, where it had been grazed the
day before by his fall, and leaning back he drew several deep
breaths.

"I'm happy, very happy!" he said to himself.  He had often before
had this sense of physical joy in his own body, but he had never
felt so fond of himself, of his own body, as at that moment.  He
enjoyed the slight ache in his strong leg, he enjoyed the
muscular sensation of movement in his chest as he breathed.  The
bright, cold August day, which had made Anna feel so hopeless,
seemed to him keenly stimulating, and refreshed his face and neck
that still tingled from the cold water.  The scent of
brilliantine on his whiskers struck him as particularly pleasant
in the fresh air.  Everything he saw from the carriage window,
everything in that cold pure air, in the pale light of the
sunset, was as fresh, and gay, and strong as he was himself: the
roofs of the houses shining in the rays of the setting sun, the
sharp outlines of fences and angles of buildings, the figures of
passers-by, the carriages that met him now and then, the
motionless green of the trees and grass, the fields with evenly
drawn furrows of potatoes, and the slanting shadows that fell
from the houses, and trees, and bushes, and even from the rows of
potatoes--everything was bright like a pretty landscape just
finished and freshly varnished.

"Get on, get on!" he said to the driver, putting his head out of
the window, and pulling a three-rouble note out of his pocket he
handed it to the man as he looked round.  The driver's hand
fumbled with something at the lamp, the whip cracked, and the
carriage rolled rapidly along the smooth highroad.

"I want nothing, nothing but this happiness," he thought,
staring at the bone button of the bell in the space between the
windows, and picturing to himself Anna just as he had seen her
last time.  "And as I go on, I love her more and more.  Here's
the garden of the Vrede Villa.  Whereabouts will she be?  Where?
How?  Why did she fix on this place to meet me, and why does she
write in Betsy's letter?" he thought, wondering now for the first
time at it.  But there was now no time for wonder.  He called to
the driver to stop before reaching the avenue, and opening the
door, jumped out of the carriage as it was moving, and went into
the avenue that led up to the house.  There was no one in the
avenue; but looking round to the right he caught sight of her.
Her face was hidden by a veil, but he drank in with glad eyes the
special movement in walking, peculiar to her alone, the slope of
the shoulders, and the setting of the head, and at once a sort of
electric shock ran all over him.  With fresh force, he felt
conscious of himself from the springy motions of his legs to the
movements of his lungs as he breathed, and something set his lips
twitching.

Joining him, she pressed his hand tightly.

"You're not angry that I sent for you?  I absolutely had to see
you," she said; and the serious and set line of her lips, which
he saw under the veil, transformed his mood at once.

"I angry!  But how have you come, where from?"

"Never mind," she said, laying her hand on his, "come along, I
must talk to you."

He saw that something had happened, and that the interview would
not be a joyous one.  In her presence he had no will of his own:
without knowing the grounds of her distress, he already felt the
same distress unconsciously passing over him.

"What is it? what?" he asked her, squeezing her hand with his
elbow, and trying to read her thoughts in her face.

She walked on a few steps in silence, gathering up her courage;
then suddenly she stopped.

"I did not tell you yesterday," she began, breathing quickly and
painfully, "that coming home with Alexey Alexandrovitch I told
him everything...told him I could not be his wife, that...and
told him everything."

He heard her, unconsciously bending his whole figure down to her
as though hoping in this way to soften the hardness of her
position for her.  But directly she had said this he suddenly
drew himself up, and a proud and hard expression came over his
face.

"Yes, yes, that's better, a thousand times better!  I know how
painful it was," he said.  But she was not listening to his
words, she was reading his thoughts from the expression of his
face.  She could not guess that that expression arose from the
first idea that presented itself to Vronsky--that a duel was now
inevitable.  The idea of a duel had never crossed her mind, and
so she put a different interpretation on this passing expression
of hardness.

When she got her husband's letter, she knew then at the bottom of
her heart that everything would go on in the old way, that she
would not have the strength of will to forego her position, to
abandon her son, and to join her lover.  The morning spent at
Princess Tverskaya's had confirmed her still more in this.  But
this interview was still of the utmost gravity for her.  She
hoped that this interview would transform her position, and save
her.  If on hearing this news he were to say to her resolutely,
passionately, without an instant's wavering: "Throw up everything
and come with me!" she would give up her son and go away with
him.  But this news had not produced what she had expected in
him; he simply seemed as though he were resenting some affront.

"It was not in the least painful to me.  It happened of itself,"
she said irritably; "and see..." she pulled her husband's letter
out of her glove.

"I understand, I understand," he interrupted her, taking the
letter, but not reading it, and trying to soothe her.  "The one
thing I longed for, the one thing I prayed for, was to cut
short this position, so as to devote my life to your happiness."

"Why do you tell me that?" she said.  "Do you suppose I can doubt
it?  If I doubted..."

"Who's that coming?" said Vronsky suddenly, pointing to two
ladies walking towards them.  "Perhaps they know us!" and he
hurriedly turned off, drawing her after him into a side path.

"Oh, I don't care!" she said.  Her lips were quivering.  And he
fancied that her eyes looked with strange fury at him from under
the veil.  "I tell you that's not the point--I can't doubt that;
but see what he writes to me.  Read it."  She stood still again.

Again, just as at the first moment of hearing of her rupture with
her husband, Vronsky, on reading the letter, was unconsciously
carried away by the natural sensation aroused in him by his own
relation to the betrayed husband.  Now while he held his letter
in his hands, he could not help picturing the challenge, which he
would most likely find at home today or tomorrow, and the duel
itself, in which, with the same cold and haughty expression that
his face was assuming at this moment he would await the injured
husband's shot, after having himself fired into the air.  And at
that instant there flashed across his mind the thought of what
Serpuhovskoy had just said to him, and what he had himself been
thinking in the morning--that it was better not to bind himself
--and he knew that this thought he could not tell her.

Having read the letter, he raised his eyes to her, and there was
no determination in them.  She saw at once that he had been
thinking about it before by himself.  She knew that whatever he
might say to her, he would not say all he thought.  And she knew
that her last hope had failed her.  This was not what she had
been reckoning on.

"You see the sort of man he is," she said, with a shaking voice;
"he..."

"Forgive me, but I rejoice at it," Vronsky interrupted.  "For
God's sake, let me finish!" he added, his eyes imploring her to
give him time to explain his words.  "I rejoice, because things
cannot, cannot possibly remain as he supposes."

"Why can't they?" Anna said, restraining her tears, and obviously
attaching no sort of consequence to what he said.  She felt that
her fate was sealed.

Vronsky meant that after the duel--inevitable, he thought--
things could not go on as before, but he said something
different.

"It can't go on.  I hope that now you will leave him.  I hope"--
he was confused, and reddened--"that you will let me arrange and
plan our life.  Tomorrow..." he was beginning.

She did not let him go on.

"But my child!" she shrieked.  "You see what he writes!  I should
have to leave him, and I can't and won't do that."

"But, for God's sake, which is better?--leave your child, or
keep up this degrading position?"

"To whom is it degrading?"

"To all, and most of all to you."

"You say degrading...don't say that.  Those words have no meaning
for me," she said in a shaking voice.  She did not want him now
to say what was untrue.  She had nothing left her but his love,
and she wanted to love him.  "Don't you understand that from the
day I loved you everything has changed for me?  For me there is
one thing, and one thing only--your love.  If that's mine, I
feel so exalted, so strong, that nothing can be humiliating to
me.  I am proud of my position, because...proud of being...
proud...."  She could not say what she was proud of.  Tears of
shame and despair choked her utterance.  She stood still and
sobbed.

He felt, too, something swelling in his throat and twitching in
his nose, and for the first time in his life he felt on the point
of weeping.  He could not have said exactly what it was touched
him so.  He felt sorry for her, and he felt he could not help
her, and with that he knew that he was to blame for her
wretchedness, and that he had done something wrong.

"Is not a divorce possible?" he said feebly.  She shook her head,
not answering.  "Couldn't you take your son, and still leave
him?"

"Yes; but it all depends on him.  Now I must go to him," she
said shortly.  Her presentiment that all would again go on in the
old way had not deceived her.

"On Tuesday I shall be in Petersburg, and everything can be
settled."

"Yes," she said.  "But don't let us talk any more of it."

Anna's carriage, which she had sent away, and ordered to come
back to the little gate of the Vrede garden, drove up.  Anna said
good-bye to Vronsky, and drove home.



Chapter 23


On Monday there was the usual sitting of the Commission of the
2nd of June.  Alexey Alexandrovitch walked into the hall where
the sitting was held, greeted the members and the president, as
usual, and sat down in his place, putting his hand on the papers
laid ready before him.  Among these papers lay the necessary
evidence and a rough outline of the speech he intended to make.
But he did not really need these documents.  He remembered every
point, and did not think it necessary to go over in his memory
what he would say.  He knew that when the time came, and when he
saw his enemy facing him, and studiously endeavoring to assume an
expression of indifference, his speech would flow of itself
better than he could prepare it now.  He felt that the import of
his speech was of such magnitude that every word of it would have
weight.  Meantime, as he listened to the usual report, he had the
most innocent and inoffensive air.  No one, looking at his white
hands, with their swollen veins and long fingers, so softly
stroking the edges of the white paper that lay before him, and at
the air of weariness with which his head drooped on one side,
would have suspected that in a few minutes a torrent of words
would flow from his lips that would arouse a fearful storm, set
the members shouting and attacking one another, and force the
president to call for order.  When the report was over, Alexey
Alexandrovitch announced in his subdued, delicate voice that he
had several points to bring before the meeting in regard to the
Commission for the Reorganization of the Native Tribes.  All
attention was turned upon him.  Alexey Alexandrovitch cleared his
throat, and not looking at his opponent, but selecting, as he
always did while he was delivering his speeches, the first person
sitting opposite him, an inoffensive little old man, who never
had an opinion of any sort in the Commission, began to expound
his views.  When he reached the point about the fundamental and
radical law, his opponent jumped up and began to protest.
Stremov, who was also a member of the Commission, and also stung
to the quick, began defending himself, and altogether a stormy
sitting followed; but Alexey Alexandrovitch triumphed, and his
motion was carried, three new commissions were appointed, and the
next day in a certain Petersburg circle nothing else was talked
of but this sitting.  Alexey Alexandrovitch's success had been
even greater than he had anticipated.

Next morning, Tuesday, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on waking up,
recollected with pleasure his triumph of the previous day, and he
could not help smiling, though he tried to appear indifferent,
when the chief secretary of his department, anxious to flatter
him, informed him of the rumors that had reached him concerning
what had happened in the Commission.

Absorbed in business with the chief secretary, Alexey
Alexandrovitch had completely forgotten that it was Tuesday, the
day fixed by him for the return of Anna Arkadyevna, and he was
surprised and received a shock of annoyance when a servant came
in to inform him of her arrival.

Anna had arrived in Petersburg early in the morning; the carriage
had been sent to meet her in accordance with her telegram, and so
Alexey Alexandrovitch might have known of her arrival.  But when
she arrived, he did not meet her.  She was told that he had not
yet gone out, but was busy with his secretary.  She sent word to
her husband that she had come, went to her own room, and occupied
herself in sorting out her things, expecting he would come to
her.  But an hour passed; he did not come.  She went into the
dining room on the pretext of giving some directions, and spoke
loudly on purpose, expecting him to come out there; but he did
not come, though she heard him go to the door of his study as he
parted from the chief secretary.  She knew that he usually went
out quickly to his office, and she wanted to see him before that,
so that their attitude to one another might be defined.

She walked across the drawing room and went resolutely to him.
When she went into his study he was in official uniform,
obviously ready to go out, sitting at a little table on which he
rested his elbows, looking dejectedly before him.  She saw him
before he saw her, and she saw that he was thinking of her.

On seeing her, he would have risen, but changed his mind, then
his face flushed hotly--a thing Anna had never seen before, and
he got up quickly and went to meet her, looking not at her eyes,
but above them at her forehead and hair.  He went up to her, took
her by the hand, and asked her to sit down.

"I am very glad you have come," he said, sitting down beside her,
and obviously wishing to say something, he stuttered.  Several
times he tried to begin to speak, but stopped.  In spite of the
fact that, preparing herself for meeting him, she had schooled
herself to despise and reproach him, she did not know what to say
to him, and she felt sorry for him.  And so the silence lasted
for some time.  "Is Seryozha quite well?" he said, and not
waiting for an answer, he added: "I shan't be dining at home
today, and I have got to go out directly."

"I had thought of going to Moscow," she said.

"No, you did quite, quite right to come," he said, and was silent
again.

Seeing that he was powerless to begin the conversation, she began
herself.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch," she said, looking at him and not
dropping her eyes under his persistent gaze at her hair, "I'm a
guilty woman, I'm a bad woman, but I am the same as I was, as I
told you then, and I have come to tell you that I can change
nothing."

"I have asked you no question about that," he said, all at once,
resolutely and with hatred looking her straight in the face;
"that was as I had supposed." Under the influence of anger he
apparently regained complete possession of all his faculties.
"But as I told you then, and have written to you," he said in a
thin, shrill voice, "I repeat now, that I am not bound to know
this.  I ignore it.  Not all wives are so kind as you, to be in
such a hurry to communicate such agreeable news to their
husbands."  He laid special emphasis on the word "agreeable."  "I
shall ignore it so long as the world knows nothing of it, so long
as my name is not disgraced.  And so I simply inform you that
our relations must be just as they have always been, and that
only in the event of your compromising me I shall be obliged to
take steps to secure my honor."

"But our relations cannot be the same as always," Anna began in a
timid voice, looking at him with dismay.

When she saw once more those composed gestures, heard that
shrill, childish, and sarcastic voice, her aversion for him
extinguished her pity for him, and she felt only afraid, but at
all costs she wanted to make clear her position.

"I cannot be your wife while I..." she began.

He laughed a cold and malignant laugh.

"The manner of life you have chosen is reflected, I suppose, in
your ideas.  I have too much respect or contempt, or both...I
respect your past and despise your present...that I was far from
the interpretation you put on my words."

Anna sighed and bowed her head.

"Though indeed I fail to comprehend how, with the independence
you show," he went on, getting hot, "--announcing your infidelity
to your husband and seeing nothing reprehensible in it,
apparently--you can see anything reprehensible in performing a
wife's duties in relation to your husband."

"Alexey Alexandrovitch!  What is it you want of me?"

"I want you not to meet that man here, and to conduct yourself so
that neither the world nor the servants can reproach you...not to
see him.  That's not much, I think.  And in return you will enjoy
all the privileges of a faithful wife without fulfilling her
duties.  That's all I have to say to you.  Now it's time for me
to go.  I'm not dining at home."  He got up and moved towards the
door.

Anna got up too.  Bowing in silence, he let her pass before him.



Chapter 24


The night spent by Levin on the haycock did not pass without
result for him.  The way in which he had been managing his land
revolted him and had lost all attraction for him.  In spite of
the magnificent harvest, never had there been, or, at least,
never it seemed to him, had there been so many hindrances and so
many quarrels between him and the peasants as that year, and the
origin of these failures and this hostility was now perfectly
comprehensible to him.  The delight he had experienced in the
work itself, and the consequent greater intimacy with the
peasants, the envy he felt of them, of their life, the desire to
adopt that life, which had been to him that night not a dream but
an intention, the execution of which he had thought out in detail
--all this had so transformed his view of the farming of the land
as he had managed it, that he could not take his former interest
in it, and could not help seeing that unpleasant relation between
him and the workpeople which was the foundation of it all.  The
herd of improved cows such as Pava, the whole land ploughed over
and enriched, the nine level fields surrounded with hedges, the
two hundred and forty acres heavily manured, the seed sown in
drills, and all the rest of it--it was all splendid if only the
work had been done for themselves, or for themselves and comrades
--people in sympathy with them.  But he saw clearly now (his work
on a book of agriculture, in which the chief element in husbandry
was to have been the laborer, greatly assisted him in this) that
the sort of farming he was carrying on was nothing but a cruel
and stubborn struggle between him and the laborers, in which
there was on one side--his side--a continual intense effort to
change everything to a pattern he considered better; on the other
side, the natural order of things.  And in this struggle he saw
that with immense expenditure of force on his side, and with no
effort or even intention on the other side, all that was attained
was that the work did not go to the liking of either side, and
that splendid tools, splendid cattle and land were spoiled with
no good to anyone.  Worst of all, the energy expended on this
work was not simply wasted.  He could not help feeling now, since
the meaning of this system had become clear to him, that the aim
of his energy was a most unworthy one.  In reality, what was the
struggle about?  He was struggling for every farthing of his
share (and he could not help it, for he had only to relax his
efforts, and he would not have had the money to pay his laborers'
wages), while they were only struggling to be able to do their
work easily and agreeably, that is to say, as they were used to
doing it.  It was for his interests that every laborer should
work as hard as possible, and that while doing so he should keep
his wits about him, so as to try not to break the winnowing
machines, the horse rakes, the thrashing machines, that he should
attend to what he was doing.  What the laborer wanted was to work
as pleasantly as possible, with rests, and above all, carelessly
and heedlessly, without thinking.  That summer Levin saw this at
every step.  He sent the men to mow some clover for hay, picking
out the worst patches where the clover was overgrown with grass
and weeds and of no use for seed; again and again they mowed the
best acres of clover, justifying themselves by the pretense that
the bailiff had told them to, and trying to pacify him with the
assurance that it would be splendid hay; but he knew that it was
owing to those acres being so much easier to mow.  He sent out a
hay machine for pitching the hay--it was broken at the first row
because it was dull work for a peasant to sit on the seat in
front with the great wings waving above him.  And he was told,
"Don't trouble, your honor, sure, the womenfolks will pitch it
quick enough."  The ploughs were practically useless, because it
never occurred to the laborer to raise the share when he turned
the plough, and forcing it round, he strained the horses and tore
up the ground, and Levin was begged not to mind about it.  The
horses were allowed to stray into the wheat because not a single
laborer would consent to be night-watchman, and in spite of
orders to the contrary, the laborers insisted on taking turns for
night duty, and Ivan, after working all day long, fell asleep,
and was very penitent for his fault, saying, "Do what you will to
me, your honor."

They killed three of the best calves by letting them into the
clover aftermath without care as to their drinking, and nothing
would make the men believe that they had been blown out by the
clover, but they told him, by way of consolation, that one of his
neighbors had lost a hundred and twelve head of cattle in three
days.  All this happened, not because anyone felt ill-will to
Levin or his farm; on the contrary, he knew that they liked him,
thought him a simple gentleman (their highest praise); but it
happened simply because all they wanted was to work merrily and
carelessly, and his interests were not only remote and
incomprehensible to them, but fatally opposed to their most just
claims.  Long before, Levin had felt dissatisfaction with his own
position in regard to the land.  He saw where his boat leaked,
but he did not look for the leak, perhaps purposely deceiving
himself.  (Nothing would be left him if he lost faith in it.) But
now he could deceive himself no longer.  The farming of the land,
as he was managing it, had become not merely unattractive but
revolting to him, and he could take no further interest in it.

To this now was joined the presence, only twenty-five miles off,
of Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, whom he longed to see and could not
see.  Darya Alexandrovna Oblonskaya had invited him, when he was
over there, to come; to come with the object of renewing his
offer to her sister, who would, so she gave him to understand,
accept him now.  Levin himself had felt on seeing Kitty
Shtcherbatskaya that he had never ceased to love her; but he
could not go over to the Oblonskys', knowing she was there.  The
fact that he had made her an offer, and she had refused him,
had placed an insuperable barrier between her and him.  "I can't
ask her to be my wife merely because she can't be the wife of the
man she wanted to marry," he said to himself.  The thought of
this made him cold and hostile to her.  "I should not be able to
speak to her without a feeling of reproach; I could not look at
her without resentment; and she will only hate me all the more,
as she's bound to.  And besides, how can I now, after what Darya
Alexandrovna told me, go to see them?  Can I help showing that I
know what she told me?  And me to go magnanimously to forgive
her, and have pity on her!  Me go through a performance before
her of forgiving, and deigning to bestow my love on her!...  What
induced Darya Alexandrovna to tell me that?  By chance I might
have seen her, then everything would have happened of itself;
but, as it is, it's out of the question, out of the question!"

Darya Alexandrovna sent him a letter, asking him for a
side-saddle for Kitty's use.  "I'm told you have a side-saddle,"
she wrote to him; "I hope you will bring it over yourself."

This was more than he could stand.  How could a woman of any
intelligence, of any delicacy, put her sister in such a
humiliating position!  He wrote ten notes, and tore them all up,
and sent the saddle without any reply.  To write that he would go
was impossible, because he could not go; to write that he could
not come because something prevented him, or that he would be
away, that was still worse.  He sent the saddle without an
answer, and with a sense of having done something shameful; he
handed over all the now revolting business of the estate to the
bailiff, and set off next day to a remote district to see his
friend Sviazhsky, who had splendid marshes for grouse in his
neighborhood, and had lately written to ask him to keep a
long-standing promise to stay with him.  The grouse-marsh, in the
Surovsky district, had long tempted Levin, but he had continually
put off this visit on account of his work on the estate.  Now he
was glad to get away from the neighborhood of the Shtcherbatskys,
and still more from his farm work, especially on a shooting
expedition, which always in trouble served as the best
consolation.



Chapter 25


In the Surovsky district there was no railway nor service of
post horses, and Levin drove there with his own horses in his
big, old-fashioned carriage.

He stopped halfway at a well-to-do peasant's to feed his horses.
A bald, well-preserved old man, with a broad, red beard, gray on
his cheeks, opened the gate, squeezing against the gatepost to
let the three horses pass.  Directing the coachman to a place
under the shed in the big, clean, tidy yard, with charred,
old-fashioned ploughs in it, the old man asked Levin to come into
the parlor.  A cleanly dressed young woman, with clogs on her
bare feet, was scrubbing the floor in the new outer room.  She
was frightened of the dog, that ran in after Levin, and uttered a
shriek, but began laughing at her own fright at once when she was
told the dog would not hurt her.  Pointing Levin with her bare
arm to the door into the parlor, she bent down again, hiding her
handsome face, and went on scrubbing.

"Would you like the samovar?" she asked.

"Yes, please."

The parlor was a big room, with a Dutch stove, and a screen
dividing it into two.  Under the holy pictures stood a table
painted in patterns, a bench, and two chairs.  Near the entrance
was a dresser full of crockery.  The shutters were closed, there
were few flies, and it was so clean that Levin was anxious that
Laska, who had been running along the road and bathing in
puddles, should not muddy the floor, and ordered her to a place
in the corner by the door.  After looking round the parlor, Levin
went out in the back yard.  The good-looking young woman in
clogs, swinging the empty pails on the yoke, ran on before him to
the well for water.

"Look sharp, my girl!" the old man shouted after her,
good-humoredly, and he went up to Levin.  "Well, sir, are you
going to Nikolay Ivanovitch Sviazhsky? His honor comes to us
too," he began, chatting, leaning his elbows on the railing of
the steps.  In the middle of the old man's account of his
acquaintance with Sviazhsky, the gates creaked again, and
laborers came into the yard from the fields, with wooden ploughs
and harrows.  The horses harnessed to the ploughs and harrows
were sleek and fat.  The laborers were obviously of the
household: two were young men in cotton shirts and caps, the two
others were hired laborers in homespun shirts, one an old man,
the other a young fellow.  Moving off from the steps, the old man
went up to the horses and began unharnessing them.

"What have they been ploughing?" asked Levin.

"Ploughing up the potatoes.  We rent a bit of land too.  Fedot,
don't let out the gelding, but take it to the trough, and we'll
put the other in harness."

"Oh, father, the ploughshares I ordered, has he brought them
along?" asked the big, healthy-looking fellow, obviously the old
man's son.

"There...in the outer room," answered the old man, bundling
together the harness he had taken off, and flinging it on the
ground.  "You can put them on, while they have dinner."

The good-looking young woman came into the outer room with the
full pails dragging at her shoulders.  More women came on the
scene from somewhere, young and handsome, middle-aged, old and
ugly, with children and without children.

The samovar was beginning to sing; the laborers and the family,
having disposed of the horses, came in to dinner.  Levin, getting
his provisions out of his carriage, invited the old man to take
tea with him.

"Well, I have had some today already," said the old man,
obviously accepting the invitation with pleasure.  "But just a
glass for company."

Over their tea Levin heard all about the old man's farming.  Ten
years before, the old man had rented three hundred acres from the
lady who owned them, and a year ago he had bought them and rented
another three hundred from a neighboring landowner.  A small part
of the land--the worst part--he let out for rent, while a
hundred acres of arable land he cultivated himself with his
family and two hired laborers.  The old man complained that
things were doing badly.  But Levin saw that he simply did so
from a feeling of propriety, and that his farm was in a
flourishing condition.  If it had been unsuccessful he would not
have bought land at thirty-five roubles the acre, he would not
have married his three sons and a nephew, he would not have
rebuilt twice after fires, and each time on a larger scale.  In
spite of the old man's complaints, it was evident that he was
proud, and justly proud, of his prosperity, proud of his sons,
his nephew, his sons' wives, his horses and his cows, and
especially of the fact that he was keeping all this farming
going.  From his conversation with the old man, Levin thought he
was not averse to new methods either.  He had planted a great
many potatoes, and his potatoes, as Levin had seen driving past,
were already past flowering and beginning to die down, while
Levin's were only just coming into flower.  He earthed up his
potatoes with a modern plough borrowed from a neighboring
landowner.  He sowed wheat.  The trifling fact that, thinning out
his rye, the old man used the rye he thinned out for his horses,
specially struck Levin.  How many times had Levin seen this
splendid fodder wasted, and tried to get it saved; but always it
had turned out to be impossible.  The peasant got this done, and
he could not say enough in praise of it as food for the beasts.

"What have the wenches to do?  They carry it out in bundles to
the roadside, and the cart brings it away."

"Well, we landowners can't manage well with our laborers," said
Levin, handing him a glass of tea.

"Thank you," said the old man, and he took the glass, but refused
sugar, pointing to a lump he had left.  "They're simple
destruction," said he.  "Look at Sviazhsky's, for instance.  We
know what the land's like--first-rate, yet there's not much of a
crop to boast of.  It's not looked after enough--that's all it
is!"

"But you work your land with hired laborers?"

"We're all peasants together.  We go into everything ourselves.
If a man's no use, he can go, and we can manage by ourselves."

"Father, Finogen wants some tar," said the young woman in the
clogs, coming in.

"Yes, yes, that's how it is, sir!" said the old man, getting up,
and crossing himself deliberately, he thanked Levin and went out.

When Levin went into the kitchen to call his coachman he saw the
whole family at dinner.  The women were standing up waiting on
them.  The young, sturdy-looking son was telling something funny
with his mouth full of pudding, and they were all laughing, the
woman in the clogs, who was pouring cabbage soup into a bowl,
laughing most merrily of all.

Very probably the good-looking face of the young woman in the
clogs had a good deal to do with the impression of well-being this
peasant household made upon Levin, but the impression was so
strong that Levin could never get rid of it.  And all the way
from the old peasant's to Sviazhsky's he kept recalling this
peasant farm as though there were something in this impression
that demanded his special attention.



Chapter 26


Sviazhsky was the marshal of his district.  He was five years
older than Levin, and had long been married.  His sister-in-law,
a young girl Levin liked very much, lived in his house; and Levin
knew that Sviazhsky and his wife would have greatly liked to
marry the girl to him.  He knew this with certainty, as so-called
eligible young men always know it, though he could never have
brought himself to speak of it to anyone; and he knew too that,
although he wanted to get married, and although by every token
this very attractive girl would make an excellent wife, he could
no more have married her, even if he had not been in love with
Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, than he could have flown up to the sky.
And this knowledge poisoned the pleasure he had hoped to find in
the visit to Sviazhsky.

On getting Sviazhsky's letter with the invitation for shooting,
Levin had immediately thought of this; but in spite of it he had
made up his mind that Sviazhsky's having such views for him was
simply his own groundless supposition, and so he would go, all
the same.  Besides, at the bottom of his heart he had a desire to
try himself, put himself to the test in regard to this girl.  The
Sviazhskys' home-life was exceedingly pleasant, and Sviazhsky
himself, the best type of man taking part in local affairs that
Levin knew, was very interesting to him.

Sviazhsky was one of those people, always a source of wonder to
Levin, whose convictions, very logical though never original, go
one way by themselves, while their life, exceedingly definite and
firm in its direction, goes its way quite apart and almost always
in direct contradiction to their convictions.  Sviazhsky was an
extremely advanced man.  He despised the nobility, and believed
the mass of the nobility to be secretly in favor of serfdom, and
only concealing their views from cowardice.  He regarded Russia
as a ruined country, rather after the style of Turkey, and the
government of Russia as so bad that he never permitted himself to
criticize its doings seriously, and yet he was a functionary of
that government and a model marshal of nobility, and when he
drove about he always wore the cockade of office and the cap with
the red band.  He considered human life only tolerable abroad,
and went abroad to stay at every opportunity, and at the same
time he carried on a complex and improved system of agriculture
in Russia, and with extreme interest followed everything and knew
everything that was being done in Russia.  He considered the
Russian peasant as occupying a stage of development intermediate
between the ape and the man, and at the same time in the local
assemblies no one was readier to shake hands with the peasants
and listen to their opinion.  He believed neither in God nor the
devil, but was much concerned about the question of the
improvement of the clergy and the maintenance of their revenues,
and took special trouble to keep up the church in his village.

On the woman question he was on the side of the extreme advocates
of complete liberty for women, and especially their right to
labor.  But he lived with his wife on such terms that their
affectionate childless home life was the admiration of everyone,
and arranged his wife's life so that she did nothing and could do
nothing but share her husband's efforts that her time should pass
as happily and as agreeably as possible.

If it had not been a characteristic of Levin's to put the most
favorable interpretation on people, Sviazhsky's character would
have presented no doubt or difficulty to him: he would have said
to himself, "a fool or a knave," and everything would have seemed
clear.  But he could not say "a fool," because Sviazhsky was
unmistakably clever, and moreover, a highly cultivated man, who
was exceptionally modest over his culture.  There was not a
subject he knew nothing of.  But he did not display his knowledge
except when he was compelled to do so.  Still less could Levin
say that he was a knave, as Sviazhsky was unmistakably an honest,
good-hearted, sensible man, who worked good-humoredly, keenly,
and perseveringly at his work; he was held in high honor by
everyone about him, and certainly he had never consciously done,
and was indeed incapable of doing, anything base.

Levin tried to understand him, and could not understand him, and
looked at him and his life as at a living enigma.

Levin and he were very friendly, and so Levin used to venture to
sound Sviazhsky, to try to get at the very foundation of his view
of life; but it was always in vain.  Every time Levin tried to
penetrate beyond the outer chambers of Sviazhsky's mind, which
were hospitably open to all, he noticed that Sviazhsky was
slightly disconcerted; faint signs of alarm were visible in his
eyes, as though he were afraid Levin would understand him, and he
would give him a kindly, good-humored repulse.

Just now, since his disenchantment with farming, Levin was
particularly glad to stay with Sviazhsky.  Apart from the fact
that the sight of this happy and affectionate couple, so pleased
with themselves and everyone else, and their well-ordered home
had always a cheering effect on Levin, he felt a longing, now
that he was so dissatisfied with his own life, to get at that
secret in Sviazhsky that gave him such clearness, definiteness,
and good courage in life.  Moreover, Levin knew that at
Sviazhsky's he should meet the landowners of the neighborhood,
and it was particularly interesting for him just now to hear and
take part in those rural conversations concerning crops,
laborers' wages, and so on, which, he was aware, are
conventionally regarded as something very low, but which seemed
to him just now to constitute the one subject of importance.  "It
was not, perhaps, of importance in the days of serfdom, and it
may not be of importance in England.  In both cases the
conditions of agriculture are firmly established; but among us
now, when everything has been turned upside down and is only just
taking shape, the question what form these conditions will take
is the one question of importance in Russia," thought Levin.

The shooting turned out to be worse than Levin had expected.  The
marsh was dry and there were no grouse at all.  He walked about
the whole day and only brought back three birds, but to make up
for that--he brought back, as he always did from shooting, an
excellent appetite, excellent spirits, and that keen,
intellectual mood which with him always accompanied violent
physical exertion.  And while out shooting, when he seemed to be
thinking of nothing at all, suddenly the old man and his family
kept coming back to his mind, and the impression of them seemed
to claim not merely his attention, but the solution of some
question connected with them.

In the evening at tea, two landowners who had come about some
business connected with a wardship were of the party, and the
interesting conversation Levin had been looking forward to sprang
up.

Levin was sitting beside his hostess at the tea table, and was
obliged to keep up a conversation with her and her sister, who
was sitting opposite him.  Madame Sviazhskaya was a round-faced,
fair-haired, rather short woman, all smiles and dimples.  Levin
tried through her to get a solution of the weighty enigma her
husband presented to his mind; but he had not complete freedom of
ideas, because he was in an agony of embarrassment.  This agony
of embarrassment was due to the fact that the sister-in-law was
sitting opposite to him, in a dress, specially put on, as he
fancied, for his benefit, cut particularly open, in the shape of
a trapeze, on her white bosom.  This quadrangular opening, in
spite of the bosom's being very white, or just because it was
very white, deprived Levin of the full use of his faculties.  He
imagined, probably mistakenly, that this low-necked bodice had
been made on his account, and felt that he had no right to look
at it, and tried not to look at it; but he felt that he was to
blame for the very fact of the low-necked bodice having been
made.  It seemed to Levin that he had deceived someone, that he
ought to explain something, but that to explain it was
impossible, and for that reason he was continually blushing, was
ill at ease and awkward.  His awkwardness infected the pretty
sister-in-law too.  But their hostess appeared not to observe
this, and kept purposely drawing her into the conversation.

"You say," she said, pursuing the subject that had been started,
"that my husband cannot be interested in what's Russian.  It's
quite the contrary; he is always in cheerful spirits abroad, but
not as he is here.  Here, he feels in his proper place.  He has
so much to do, and he has the faculty of interesting himself in
everything.  Oh, you've not been to see our school, have you?"

"I've seen it....  The little house covered with ivy, isn't it?"

"Yes; that's Nastia's work," she said, indicating her sister.

"You teach in it yourself?" asked Levin, trying to look above the
open neck, but feeling that wherever he looked in that direction
he should see it.

"Yes; I used to teach in it myself, and do teach still, but we
have a first-rate schoolmistress now.  And we've started
gymnastic exercises."

"No, thank you, I won't have any more tea," said Levin, and
conscious of doing a rude thing, but incapable of continuing the
conversation, he got up, blushing.  "I hear a very interesting
conversation," he added, and walked to the other end of the
table, where Sviazhsky was sitting with the two gentlemen of the
neighborhood.  Sviazhsky was sitting sideways, with one elbow on
the table, and a cup in one hand, while with the other hand he
gathered up his beard, held it to his nose and let it drop again,
as though he were smelling it.  His brilliant black eyes were
looking straight at the excited country gentleman with gray
whiskers, and apparently he derived amusement from his remarks.
The gentleman was complaining of the peasants.  It was evident to
Levin that Sviazhsky knew an answer to this gentleman's
complaints, which would at once demolish his whole contention,
but that in his position he could not give utterance to this
answer, and listened, not without pleasure, to the landowner's
comic speeches.

The gentleman with the gray whiskers was obviously an inveterate
adherent of serfdom and a devoted agriculturist, who had lived
all his life in the country.  Levin saw proofs of this in his
dress, in the old-fashioned threadbare coat, obviously not his
everyday attire, in his shrewd, deep-set eyes, in his idiomatic,
fluent Russian, in the imperious tone that had become habitual
from long use, and in the resolute gestures of his large, red,
sunburnt hands, with an old betrothal ring on the little finger.



Chapter 27


"If I'd only the heart to throw up what's been set going...such a
lot of trouble wasted...I'd turn my back on the whole business,
sell up, go off like Nikolay Ivanovitch...to hear _La Belle
Hélène_," said the landowner, a pleasant smile lighting up his
shrewd old face.

"But you see you don't throw it up," said Nikolay Ivanovitch
Sviazhsky; "so there must be something gained."

"The only gain is that I live in my own house, neither bought
nor hired.  Besides, one keeps hoping the people will learn
sense.  Though, instead of that, you'd never believe it--the
drunkenness, the immorality!  They keep chopping and changing
their bits of land.  Not a sight of a horse or a cow.  The
peasant's dying of hunger, but just go and take him on as a
laborer, he'll do his best to do you a mischief, and then bring
you up before the justice of the peace."

"But then you make complaints to the justice too," said
Sviazhsky.

"I lodge complaints?  Not for anything in the world!  Such a
talking, and such a to-do, that one would have cause to regret
it.  At the works, for instance, they pocketed the advance-money
and made off.  What did the justice do?  Why, acquitted them.
Nothing keeps them in order but their own communal court and
their village elder.  He'll flog them in the good old style!  But
for that there'd be nothing for it but to give it all up and run
away."

Obviously the landowner was chaffing Sviazhsky, who, far from
resenting it, was apparently amused by it.

"But you see we manage our land without such extreme measures,"
said he, smiling: "Levin and I and this gentleman."

He indicated the other landowner.

"Yes, the thing's done at Mihail Petrovitch's, but ask him how
it's done.  Do you call that a rational system?" said the
landowner, obviously rather proud of the word "rational."

"My system's very simple," said Mihail Petrovitch, "thank God.
All my management rests on getting the money ready for the autumn
taxes, and the peasants come to me, 'Father, master, help us!'
Well, the peasants are all one's neighbors; one feels for them.
So one advances them a third, but one says: 'Remember, lads, I
have helped you, and you must help me when I need it--whether
it's the sowing of the oats, or the haycutting, or the harvest';
and well, one agrees, so much for each taxpayer--though there
are dishonest ones among them too, it's true."

Levin, who had long been familiar with these patriarchal methods,
exchanged glances with Sviazhsky and interrupted Mihail
Petrovitch, turning again to the gentleman with the gray
whiskers.

"Then what do you think?" he asked; "what system is one to adopt
nowadays?"

"Why, manage like Mihail Petrovitch, or let the land for half the
crop or for rent to the peasants; that one can do--only that's
just how the general prosperity of the country is being ruined.
Where the land with serf-labor and good management gave a yield
of nine to one, on the half-crop system it yields three to one.
Russia has been ruined by the emancipation!"

Sviazhsky looked with smiling eyes at Levin, and even made a
faint gesture of irony to him; but Levin did not think the
landowner's words absurd, he understood them better than he did
Sviazhsky.  A great deal more of what the gentleman with the gray
whiskers said to show in what way Russia was ruined by the
emancipation struck him indeed as very true, new to him, and
quite incontestable.  The landowner unmistakably spoke his own
individual thought--a thing that very rarely happens--and a
thought to which he had been brought not by a desire of finding
some exercise for an idle brain, but a thought which had grown up
out of the conditions of his life, which he had brooded over in
the solitude of his village, and had considered in every aspect.

"The point is, don't you see, that progress of every sort is only
made by the use of authority," he said, evidently wishing to show
he was not without culture.  "Take the reforms of Peter, of
Catherine, of Alexander.  Take European history.  And progress in
agriculture more than anything else--the potato, for instance,
that was introduced among us by force.  The wooden plough too
wasn't always used.  It was introduced maybe in the days before
the Empire, but it was probably brought in by force.  Now, in our
own day, we landowners in the serf times used various
improvements in our husbandry: drying machines and thrashing
machines, and carting manure and all the modern implements--all
that we brought into use by our authority, and the peasants
opposed it at first, and ended by imitating us.  Now, by the
abolition of serfdom we have been deprived of our authority; and
so our husbandry, where it had been raised to a high level, is
bound to sink to the most savage primitive condition.  That's how
I see it."

"But why so?  If it's rational, you'll be able to keep up the
same system with hired labor," said Sviazhsky.

"We've no power over them.  With whom am I going to work the
system, allow me to ask?"

"There it is--the labor force--the chief element in
agriculture," thought Levin.

"With laborers."

"The laborers won't work well, and won't work with good
implements.  Our laborer can do nothing but get drunk like a pig,
and when he's drunk he ruins everything you give him.  He makes
the horses ill with too much water, cuts good harness, barters
the tires of the wheels for drink, drops bits of iron into the
thrashing machine, so as to break it.  He loathes the sight of
anything that's not after his fashion.  And that's how it is the
whole level of husbandry has fallen.  Lands gone out of
cultivation, overgrown with weeds, or divided among the peasants,
and where millions of bushels were raised you get a hundred
thousand; the wealth of the country has decreased.  If the same
thing had been done, but with care that..."

And he proceeded to unfold his own scheme of emancipation by
means of which these drawbacks might have been avoided.

This did not interest Levin, but when he had finished, Levin went
back to his first position, and, addressing Sviazhsky, and trying
to draw him into expressing his serious opinion:--

"That the standard of culture is falling, and that with our
present relations to the peasants there is no possibility of
farming on a rational system to yield a profit--that's perfectly
true," said he.

"I don't believe it," Sviazhsky replied quite seriously; "all I
see is that we don't know how to cultivate the land, and that our
system of agriculture in the serf days was by no means too high,
but too low.  We have no machines, no good stock, no efficient
supervision; we don't even know how to keep accounts.  Ask any
landowner; he won't be able to tell you what crop's profitable,
and what's not."

"Italian bookkeeping," said the gentleman of the gray whiskers
ironically.  "You may keep your books as you like, but if they
spoil everything for you, there won't be any profit."

"Why do they spoil things? A poor thrashing machine, or your
Russian presser, they will break, but my steam press they don't
break.  A wretched Russian nag they'll ruin, but keep good
dray-horses--they won't ruin them.  And so it is all round.  We
must raise our farming to a higher level."

"Oh, if one only had the means to do it, Nikolay Ivanovitch!
It's all very well for you; but for me, with a son to keep at the
university, lads to be educated at the high school--how am I
going to buy these dray-horses?"

"Well, that's what the land banks are for."

"To get what's left me sold by auction?  No, thank you."

"I don't agree that it's necessary or possible to raise the level
of agriculture still higher," said Levin.  "I devote myself to
it, and I have means, but I can do nothing.  As to the banks, I
don't know to whom they're any good.  For my part, anyway,
whatever I've spent money on in the way of husbandry, it has been
a loss:  stock--a loss, machinery--a loss."

"That's true enough," the gentleman with the gray whiskers chimed
in, positively laughing with satisfaction.

"And I'm not the only one," pursued Levin.  "I mix with all the
neighboring landowners, who are cultivating their land on a
rational system; they all, with rare exceptions, are doing so at
a loss.  Come, tell us how does your land do--does it pay?" said
Levin, and at once in Sviazhsky's eyes he detected that fleeting
expression of alarm which he had noticed whenever he had tried to
penetrate beyond the outer chambers of Sviazhsky's mind.

Moreover, this question on Levin's part was not quite in good
faith.  Madame Sviazhskaya had just told him at tea that they had
that summer invited a German expert in bookkeeping from Moscow,
who for a consideration of five hundred roubles had investigated
the management of their property, and found that it was costing
them a loss of three thousand odd roubles.  She did not remember
the precise sum, but it appeared that the German had worked it
out to the fraction of a farthing.

The gray-whiskered landowner smiled at the mention of the profits
of Sviazhsky's famling, obviously aware how much gain his
neighbor and marshal was likely to be making.

"Possibly it does not pay," answered Sviazhsky.  "That merely
proves either that I'm a bad manager, or that I've sunk my
capital for the increase of my rents."

"Oh, rent!" Levin cried with horror.  "Rent there may be in
Europe, where land has been improved by the labor put into it,
but with us all the land is deteriorating from the labor put into
it--in other words they're working it out; so there's no
question of rent."

"How no rent?  It's a law."

"Then we're outside the law; rent explains nothing for us, but
simply muddles us.  No, tell me how there can be a theory of
rent?..."

"Will you have some junket?  Masha, pass us some junket or
raspberries." He turned to his wife.  "Extraordinarily late the
raspberries are lasting this year."

And in the happiest frame of mind Sviazhsky got up and walked
off, apparently supposing the conversation to have ended at the
very point when to Levin it seemed that it was only just
beginning.

Having lost his antagonist, Levin continued the conversation with
the gray-whiskered landowner, trying to prove to him that all the
difficulty arises from the fact that we don't find out the
peculiarities and habits of our laborer; but the landowner, like
all men who think independently and in isolation, was slow in
taking in any other person's idea, and particularly partial to
his own.  He stuck to it that the Russian peasant is a swine and
likes swinishness, and that to get him out of his swinishness one
must have authority, and there is none; one must have the stick,
and we have become so liberal that we have all of a sudden
replaced the stick that served us for a thousand years by lawyers
and model prisons, where the worthless, stinking peasant is fed
on good soup and has a fixed allowance of cubic feet of air.

"What makes you think," said Levin, trying to get back to the
question, "that it's impossible to find some relation to the
laborer in which the labor would become productive?"

"That never could be so with the Russian peasantry; we've no
power over them," answered the landowner.

"How can new conditions be found?" said Sviazhsky.  Having eaten
some junket and lighted a cigarette, he came back to the
discussion.  "All possible relations to the labor force have been
defined and studied," he said.  "The relic of barbarism, the
primitive commune with each guarantee for all, will disappear of
itself; serfdom has been abolished--there remains nothing but
free labor, and its forms are fixed and ready made, and must be
adopted.  Permanent hands, day-laborers, rammers--you can't get
out of those forms."

"But Europe is dissatisfied with these forms."

"Dissatisfied, and seeking new ones.  And will find them, in all
probability."

"That's just what I was meaning," answered Levin.  "Why
shouldn't we seek them for ourselves?"

"Because it would be just like inventing afresh the means for
constructing railways.  They are ready, invented."

"But if they don't do for us, if they're stupid?" said Levin.

And again he detected the expression of alarm in the eyes of
Sviazhsky.

"Oh, yes; we'll bury the world under our caps!  We've found the
secret Europe was seeking for!  I've heard all that; but, excuse
me, do you know all that's been done in Europe on the question of
the organization of labor?"

"No, very little."

"That question is now absorbing the best minds in Europe.  The
Schulze-Delitsch movement.... And then all this enormous
literature of the labor question, the most liberal Lassalle
movement...the Mulhausen experiment?  That's a fact by now, as
you're probably aware."

"I have some idea of it, but very vague."

"No, you only say that; no doubt you know all about it as well as
I do.  I'm not a professor of sociology, of course, but it
interested me, and really, if it interests you, you ought to
study it."

"But what conclusion have they come to?"

"Excuse me..."

The two neighbors had risen, and Sviazhsky, once more checking
Levin in his inconvenient habit of peeping into what was beyond
the outer chambers of his mind, went to see his guests out.



Chapter 28


Levin was insufferably bored that evening with the ladies; he was
stirred as he had never been before by the idea that the
dissatisfaction he was feeling with his system of managing his
land was not an exceptional case, but the general condition of
things in Russia; that the organization of some relation of the
laborers to the soil in which they would work, as with the
peasant he had met half-way to the Sviazhskys', was not a dream,
but a problem which must be solved.  And it seemed to him that
the problem could be solved, and that he ought to try and solve
it.

After saying good-night to the ladies, and promising to stay the
whole of the next day, so as to make an expedition on horseback
with them to see an interesting ruin in the crown forest, Levin
went, before going to bed, into his host's study to get the books
on the labor question that Sviazhsky had offered him.
Sviazhsky's study was a huge room, surrounded by bookcases and
with two tables in it--one a massive writing table, standing in
the middle of the room, and the other a round table, covered with
recent numbers of reviews and journals in different languages,
ranged like the rays of a star round the lamp.  On the writing
table was a stand of drawers marked with gold lettering, and full
of papers of various sorts.

Sviazhsky took out the books, and sat down in a rocking-chair.

"What are you looking at there?" he said to Levin, who was
standing at the round table looking through the reviews.

"Oh, yes, there's a very interesting article here," said
Sviazhsky of the review Levin was holding in his hand.  "It
appears," he went on, with eager interest, "that Friedrich was
not, after all, the person chiefly responsible for the partition
of Poland.  It is proved..."

And with his characteristic clearness, he summed up those new,
very important, and interesting revelations.  Although Levin was
engrossed at the moment by his ideas about the problem of the
land, he wondered, as he heard Sviazhsky: "What is there inside
of him?  And why, why is he interested in the partition of
Poland?"  When Sviazhsky had finished, Levin could not help
asking: "Well, and what then?"  But there was nothing to follow.
It was simply interesting that it had been proved to be so and
so.  But Sviazhsky did not explain, and saw no need to explain
why it was interesting to him.

"Yes, but I was very much interested by your irritable neighbor,"
said Levin, sighing.  "He's a clever fellow, and said a lot that
was true."

"Oh, get along with you!  An inveterate supporter of serfdom at
heart, like all of them!" said Sviazhsky.

"Whose marshal you are."

"Yes, only I marshal them in the other direction," said
Sviazhsky, laughing.

"I'll tell you what interests me very much," said Levin.  "He's
right that our system, that's to say of rational farming, doesn't
answer, that the only thing that answers is the money-lender
system, like that meek-looking gentleman's, or else the very
simplest....  Whose fault is it?"

"Our own, of course.  Besides, it's not true that it doesn't
answer.  It answers with Vassiltchikov."

"A factory..."

"But I really don't know what it is you are surprised at.  The
people are at such a low stage of rational and moral development,
that it's obvious they're bound to oppose everything that's
strange to them.  In Europe, a rational system answers because
the people are educated; it follows that we must educate the
people--that's all."

"But how are we to educate the people?"

"To educate the people three things are needed: schools, and
schools, and schools.

"But you said yourself the people are at such a low stage of
material development: what help are schools for that?"

"Do you know, you remind me of the story of the advice given to
the sick man--You should try purgative medicine.  Taken: worse.
Try leeches.  Tried them: worse.  Well, then, there's nothing
left but to pray to God.  Tried it: worse.  That's just how it is
with us.  I say political economy; you say--worse.  I say
socialism: worse.  Education: worse."

"But how do schools help matters?"

"They give the peasant fresh wants."

"Well, that's a thing I've never understood," Levin replied with
heat.  "In what way are schools going to help the people to
improve their material position?  You say schools, education,
will give them fresh wants.  So much the worse, since they won't
be capable of satisfying them.  And in what way a knowledge of
addition and subtraction and the catechism is going to improve
their material condition, I never could make out.  The day
before yesterday, I met a peasant woman in the evening with a
little baby, and asked her where she was going.  She said she was
going to the wise woman; her boy had screaming fits, so she was
taking him to be doctored.  I asked, 'Why, how does the wise
woman cure screaming fits?'  'She puts the child on the hen-roost
and repeats some charm....' "

"Well, you're saying it yourself!  What's wanted to prevent her
taking her child to the hen-roost to cure it of screaming fits is
just..." Sviazhsky said, smiling good-humoredly.

"Oh, no!" said Levin with annoyance; "that method of doctoring I
merely meant as a simile for doctoring the people with schools.
The people are poor and ignorant--that we see as surely as the
peasant woman sees the baby is ill because it screams.  But in
what way this trouble of poverty and ignorance is to be cured by
schools is as incomprehensible as how the hen-roost affects the
screaming.  What has to be cured is what makes him poor."

"Well, in that, at least, you're in agreement with Spencer, whom
you dislike so much.  He says, too, that education may be the
consequence of greater prosperity and comfort, of more frequent
washing, as he says, but not of being able to read and write..."

"Well, then, I'm very glad--or the contrary, very sorry, that
I'm in agreement with Spencer; only I've known it a long while.
Schools can do no good; what will do good is an economic
organization in which the people will become richer, will have
more leisure--and then there will be schools."

"Still, all over Europe now schools are obligatory."

"And how far do you agree with Spencer yourself about it?" asked
Levin.

But there was a gleam of alarm in Sviazhsky's eyes, and he said
smiling:

"No; that screaming story is positively capital!  Did you really
hear it yourself?"

Levin saw that he was not to discover the connection between this
man's life and his thoughts.  Obviously he did not care in the
least what his reasoning led him to; all he wanted was the
process of reasoning.  And he did not like it when the process of
reasoning brought him into a blind alley.  That was the only
thing he disliked, and avoided by changing the conversation to
something agreeable and amusing.

All the impressions of the day, beginning with the impression
made by the old peasant, which served, as it were, as the
fundamental basis of all the conceptions and ideas of the day,
threw Levin into violent excitement.  This dear good Sviazhsky,
keeping a stock of ideas simply for social purposes, and
obviously having some other principles hidden from Levin, while
with the crowd, whose name is legion, he guided public opinion by
ideas he did not share; that irascible country gentleman,
perfectly correct in the conclusions that he had been worried
into by life, but wrong in his exasperation against a whole
class, and that the best class in Russia; his own dissatisfaction
with the work he had been doing, and the vague hope of finding a
remedy for all this--all was blended in a sense of inward
turmoil, and anticipation of some solution near at hand.

Left alone in the room assigned him, lying on a spring mattress
that yielded unexpectedly at every movement of his arm or his
leg, Levin did not fall asleep for a long while.  Not one
conversation with Sviazhsky, though he had said a great deal that
was clever, had interested Levin; but the conclusions of the
irascible landowner required consideration.  Levin could not help
recalling every word he had said, and in imagination amending his
own replies.

"Yes, I ought to have said to him: You say that our husbandry
does not answer because the peasant hates improvements, and that
they must be forced on him by authority.  If no system of
husbandry answered at all without these improvements, you would
be quite right.  But the only system that does answer is where
laborer is working in accordance with his habits, just as on the
old peasant's land half-way here.  Your and our general
dissatisfaction with the system shows that either we are to blame
or the laborers.  We have gone our way--the European way--a
long while, without asking ourselves about the qualities of our
labor force.  Let us try to look upon the labor force not as an
abstract force, but as the _Russian peasant_ with his instincts,
and we shall arrange our system of culture in accordance with
that.  Imagine, I ought to have said to him, that you have the
same system as the old peasant has, that you have found means of
making your laborers take an interest in the success of the work,
and have found the happy mean in the way of improvements which
they will admit, and you will, without exhausting the soil, get
twice or three times the yield you got before.  Divide it in
halves, give half as the share of labor, the surplus left you
will be greater, and the share of labor will be greater too.  And
to do this one must lower the standard of husbandry and interest
the laborers in its success.  How to do this?--that's a matter
of detail; but undoubtedly it can be done."

This idea threw Levin into a great excitement.  He did not sleep
half the night, thinking over in detail the putting of his idea
into practice.  He had not intended to go away next day, but he
now determined to go home early in the morning.  Besides, the
sister-in-law with her low-necked bodice aroused in him a feeling
akin to shame and remorse for some utterly base action.  Most
important of all--he must get back without delay: he would have
to make haste to put his new project to the peasants before the
sowing of the winter wheat, so that the sowing might be
undertaken on a new basis.  He had made up his mind to
revolutionize his whole system.



Chapter 29


The carrying out of Levin's plan presented many difficulties; but
he struggled on, doing his utmost, and attained a result which,
though not what he desired, was enough to enable him, without
self-deception, to believe that the attempt was worth the
trouble.  One of the chief difficulties was that the process of
cultivating the land was in full swing, that it was impossible to
stop everything and begin it all again from the beginning, and
the machine had to be mended while in motion.

When on the evening that he arrived home he informed the bailiff
of his plans, the latter with visible pleasure agreed with what
he said so long as he was pointing out that all that had been
done up to that time was stupid and useless.  The bailiff said
that he had said so a long while ago, but no heed had been paid
him.  But as for the proposal made by Levin--to take a part as
shareholder with his laborers in each agricultural undertaking--
at this the bailiff simply expressed a profound despondency, and
offered no definite opinion, but began immediately talking of the
urgent necessity of carrying the remaining sheaves of rye the
next day, and of sending the men out for the second ploughing, so
that Levin felt that this was not the time for discussing it.

On beginning to talk to the peasants about it, and making a
proposition to cede them the land on new terms, he came into
collision with the same great difficulty that they were so much
absorbed by the current work of the day, that they had not time
to consider the advantages and disadvantages of the proposed
scheme.

The simple-hearted Ivan, the cowherd, seemed completely to grasp
Levin's proposal--that he should with his family take a share of
the profits of the cattle-yard--and he was in complete sympathy
with the plan.  But when Levin hinted at the future advantages,
Ivan's face expressed alarm and regret that he could not hear all
he had to say, and he made haste to find himself some task that
would admit of no delay: he either snatched up the fork to pitch
the hay out of the pens, or ran to get water or to clear out the
dung.

Another difficulty lay in the invincible disbelief of the peasant
that a landowner's object could be anything else than a desire to
squeeze all he could out of them.  They were firmly convinced
that his real aim (whatever he might say to them) would always be
in what he did not say to them.  And they themselves, in giving
their opinion, said a great deal but never said what was their
real object.  Moreover (Levin felt that the irascible landowner
had been right) the peasants made their first and unalterable
condition of any agreement whatever that they should not be
forced to any new methods of tillage of any kind, nor to use new
implements.  They agreed that the modern plough ploughed better,
that the scarifier did the work more quickly, but they found
thousands of reasons that made it out of the question for them to
use either of them; and though he had accepted the conviction
that he would have to lower the standard of cultivation, he felt
sorry to give up improved methods, the advantages of which were
so obvious.  But in spite of all these difficulties he got his
way, and by autumn the system was working, or at least so it
seemed to him.

At first Levin had thought of giving up the whole farming of the
land just as it was to the peasants, the laborers, and the
bailiff on new conditions of partnership; but he was very soon
convinced that this was impossible, and determined to divide it
up.  The cattle-yard, the garden, hay fields, and arable land,
divided into several parts, had to be made into separate lots.
The simple-hearted cowherd, Ivan, who, Levin fancied, understood
the matter better than any of them, collecting together a gang of
workers to help him, principally of his own family, became a
partner in the cattle-yard.  A distant part of the estate, a
tract of waste land that had lain fallow for eight years, was
with the help of the clever carpenter, Fyodor Ryezunov, taken by
six families of peasants on new conditions of partnership, and
the peasant Shuraev took the management of all the vegetable
gardens on the same terms.  The remainder of the land was still
worked on the old system, but these three associated partnerships
were the first step to a new organization of the whole, and they
completely took up Levin's time.

It is true that in the cattle-yard things went no better than
before, and Ivan strenuously opposed warm housing for the cows
and butter made of fresh cream, affirming that cows require less
food if kept cold, and that butter is more profitable made from
sour cream, and he asked for wages just as under the old system,
and took not the slightest interest in the fact that the money he
received was not wages but an advance out of his future share in
the profits.

It is true that Fyodor Ryezunov's company did not plough over the
ground twice before sowing, as had been agreed, justifying
themselves on the plea that the time was too short.  It is true
that the peasants of the same company, though they had agreed to
work the land on new conditions, always spoke of the land, not as
held in partnership, but as rented for half the crop, and more
than once the peasants and Ryezunov himself said to Levin, "If
you would take a rent for the land, it would save you trouble,
and we should be more free."  Moreover the same peasants kept
putting off, on various excuses, the building of a cattleyard and
barn on the land as agreed upon, and delayed doing it till the
winter.

It is true that Shuraev would have liked to let out the kitchen
gardens he had undertaken in small lots to the peasants.  He
evidently quite misunderstood, and apparently intentionally
misunderstood, the conditions upon which the land had been given
to him.

Often, too, talking to the peasants and explaining to them all
the advantages of the plan, Levin felt that the peasants heard
nothing but the sound of his voice, and were firmly resolved,
whatever he might say, not to let themselves be taken in.  He
felt this especially when he talked to the cleverest of the
peasants, Ryezunov, and detected the gleam in Ryezunov's eyes
which showed so plainly both ironical amusement at Levin, and the
firm conviction that, if any one were to be taken in, it would
not be he, Ryezunov.  But in spite of all this Levin thought the
system worked, and that by keeping accounts strictly and
insisting on his own way, he would prove to them in the future
the advantages of the arrangement, and then the system would go
of itself.

These matters, together with the management of the land still
left on his hands, and the indoor work over his book, so
engrossed Levin the whole summer that he scarcely ever went out
shooting.  At the end of August he heard that the Oblonskys had
gone away to Moscow, from their servant who brought back the
side-saddle.  He felt that in not answering Darya Alexandrovna's
letter he had by his rudeness, of which he could not think
without a flush of shame, burned his ships, and that he would
never go and see them again.  He had been just as rude with the
Sviazhskys, leaving them without saying good-bye.  But he would
never go to see them again either.  He did not care about that
now.  The business of reorganizing the farming of his land
absorbed him as completely as though there would never be
anything else in his life.  He read the books lent him by
Sviazhsky, and copying out what he had not got, he read both the
economic and socialistic books on the subject, but, as he had
anticipated, found nothing bearing on the scheme he had
undertaken.  In the books on political economy--in Mill, for
instance, whom he studied first with great ardor, hoping every
minute to find an answer to the questions that were engrossing
him--he found laws deduced from the condition of land culture in
Europe; but he did not see why these laws, which did not apply in
Russia, must be general.  He saw just the same thing in the
socialistic books: either they were the beautiful but
impracticable fantasies which had fascinated him when he was a
student, or they were attempts at improving, rectifying the
economic position in which Europe was placed, with which the
system of land tenure in Russia had nothing in common.  Political
economy told him that the laws by which the wealth of Europe had
been developed, and was developing, were universal and unvarying.
Socialism told him that development along these lines leads to
ruin.  And neither of them gave an answer, or even a hint, in
reply to the question what he, Levin, and all the Russian
peasants and landowners, were to do with their millions of hands
and millions of acres, to make them as productive as possible for
the common weal.

Having once taken the subject up, he read conscientiously
everything bearing on it, and intended in the autumn to go abroad
to study land systems on the spot, in order that he might not on
this question be confronted with what so often met him on various
subjects.  Often, just as he was beginning to understand the idea
in the mind of anyone he was talking to, and was beginning to
explain his own, he would suddenly be told: "But Kauffmann, but
Jones, but Dubois, but Michelli?  You haven't read them: they've
thrashed that question out thoroughly."

He saw now distinctly that Kauffmann and Michelli had nothing to
tell him.  He knew what he wanted.  He saw that Russia has
splendid land, splendid laborers, and that in certain cases, as
at the peasant's on the way to Sviazhsky's, the produce raised by
the laborers and the land is great--in the majority of cases
when capital is applied in the European way the produce is small,
and that this simply arises from the fact that the laborers want
to work and work well only in their own peculiar way, and that
this antagonism is not incidental but invariable, and has its
roots in the national spirit.  He thought that the Russian people
whose task it was to colonize and cultivate vast tracts of
unoccupied land, consciously adhered, till all their land was
occupied, to the methods suitable to their purpose, and that
their methods were by no means so bad as was generally supposed.
And he wanted to prove this theoretically in his book and
practically on his land.



Chapter 30


At the end of September the timber had been carted for building
the cattleyard on the land that had been allotted to the
association of peasants, and the butter from the cows was sold
and the profits divided.  In practice the system worked
capitally, or, at least, so it seemed to Levin.  In order to work
out the whole subject theoretically and to complete his book,
which, in Levin's daydreams, was not merely to effect a
revolution in political economy, but to annihilate that science
entirely and to lay the foundation of a new science of the
relation of the people to the soil, all that was left to do was
to make a tour abroad, and to study on the spot all that had been
done in the same direction, and to collect conclusive evidence
that all that had been done there was not what was wanted.  Levin
was only waiting for the delivery of his wheat to receive the
money for it and go abroad.  But the rains began, preventing the
harvesting of the corn and potatoes left in the fields, and
putting a stop to all work, even to the delivery of the wheat.

The mud was impassable along the roads; two mills were carried
away, and the weather got worse and worse.

On the 30th of September the sun came out in the morning, and
hoping for fine weather, Levin began making final preparations
for his journey.  He gave orders for the wheat to be delivered,
sent the bailiff to the merchant to get the money owing him, and
went out himself to give some final directions on the estate
before setting off.

Having finished all his business, soaked through with the streams
of water which kept running down the leather behind his neck and
his gaiters, but in the keenest and most confident temper, Levin
returned homewards in the evening.  The weather had become worse
than ever towards evening; the hail lashed the drenched mare so
cruelly that she went along sideways, shaking her head and ears;
but Levin was all right under his hood, and he looked cheerfully
about him at the muddy streams running under the wheels, at the
drops hanging on every bare twig, at the whiteness of the patch
of unmelted hailstones on the planks of the bridge, at the thick
layer of still juicy, fleshy leaves that lay heaped up about the
stripped elm-tree.  In spite of the gloominess of nature around
him, he felt peculiarly eager.  The talks he had been having with
the peasants in the further village had shown that they were
beginning to get used to their new position.  The old servant to
whose hut he had gone to get dry evidently approved of Levin's
plan, and of his own accord proposed to enter the partnership by
the purchase of cattle.

"I have only to go stubbornly on towards my aim, and I shall
attain my end," thought Levin; "and it's something to work and
take trouble for.  This is not a matter of myself individually;
the question of the public welfare comes into it.  The whole
system of culture, the chief element in the condition of the
people, must be completely transformed.  Instead of poverty,
general prosperity and content; instead of hostility, harmony and
unity of interests.  In short, a bloodless revolution, but a
revolution of the greatest magnitude, beginning in the little
circle of our district, then the province, then Russia, the whole
world.  Because a just idea cannot but be fruitful.  Yes, it's an
aim worth working for.  And its being me, Kostya Levin, who went
to a ball in a black tie, and was refused by the Shtcherbatskaya
girl, and who was intrinsically such a pitiful, worthless
creature--that proves nothing; I feel sure Franklin felt just as
worthless, and he too had no faith in himself, thinking of
himself as a whole.  That means nothing.  And he too, most
likely, had an Agafea Mihalovna to whom he confided his secrets."

Musing on such thoughts Levin reached home in the darkness.

The bailiff, who had been to the merchant, had come back and
brought part of the money for the wheat.  An agreement had been
made with the old servant, and on the road the bailiff had
learned that everywhere the corn was still standing in the
fields, so that his one hundred and sixty shocks that had not
been carried were nothing in comparison with the losses of
others.

After dinner Levin was sitting, as he usually did, in an
easy chair with a book, and as he read he went on thinking of the
journey before him in connection with his book.  Today all the
significance of his book rose before him with special
distinctness, and whole periods ranged themselves in his mind in
illustration of his theories.  "I must write that down," he
thought.  "That ought to form a brief introduction, which I
thought unnecessary before." He got up to go to his writing
table, and Laska, lying at his feet, got up too, stretching and
looking at him as though to inquire where to go.  But he had not
time to write it down, for the head peasants had come round, and
Levin went out into the hall to them.

After his levee, that is to say, giving directions about the
labors of the next day, and seeing all the peasants who had
business with him, Levin went back to his study and sat down to
work.

Laska lay under the table; Agafea Mihalovna settled herself in
her place with her stocking.

After writing for a little while, Levin suddenly thought with
exceptional vividness of Kitty, her refusal, and their last
meeting.  He got up and began walking about the room.

"What's the use of being dreary?" said Agafea Mihalovna.  "Come,
why do you stay on at home?  You ought to go to some warm
springs, especially now you're ready for the journey."

"Well, I am going away the day after tomorrow, Agafea Mihalovna;
I must finish my work."

"There, there, your work, you say!  As if you hadn't done enough
for the peasants!  Why, as 'tis, they're saying, 'Your master
will be getting some honor from the Tsar for it.' Indeed and it
is a strange thing; why need you worry about the peasants?"

"I'm not worrying about them; I'm doing it for my own good."

Agafea Mihalovna knew every detail of Levin's plans for his land.
Levin often put his views before her in all their complexity, and
not uncommonly he argued with her and did not agree with her
comments.  But on this occasion she entirely misinterpreted what
he had said.

"Of one's soul's salvation we all know and must think before all
else," she said with a sigh.  "Parfen Denisitch now, for all he
was no scholar, he died a death that God grant every one of us
the like," she said, referring to a servant who had died
recently.  "Took the sacrament and all."

"That's not what I mean," said he.  "I mean that I'm acting for
my own advantage.  It's all the better for me if the peasants do
their work better."

"Well, whatever you do, if he's a lazy good-for-nought,
everything'll be at sixes and sevens.  If he has a conscience,
he'll work, and if not, there's no doing anything."

"Oh, come, you say yourself Ivan has begun looking after the
cattle better."

"All I say is," answered Agafea Mihalovna, evidently not speaking
at random, but in strict sequence of idea, "that you ought to get
married, that's what I say."

Agafea Mihalovna's allusion to the very subject he had only just
been thinking about, hurt and stung him.  Levin scowled, and
without answering her, he sat down again to his work, repeating
to himself all that he had been thinking of the real significance
of that work.  Only at intervals he listened in the stillness to
the click of Agafea Mihalovna's needles, and recollecting what he
did not want to remember, he frowned again.

At nine o'clock they heard the bell and the faint vibration of a
carriage over the mud.

"Well, here's visitors come to us, and you won't be dull," said
Agafea Mihalovna, getting up and going to the door.  But Levin
overtook her.  His work was not going well now, and he was glad
of a visitor, whoever it might be.



Chapter 31


Running halfway down the staircase, Levin caught a sound he
knew, a familiar cough in the hall.  But he heard it indistinctly
through the sound of his own footsteps, and hoped he was
mistaken.  Then he caught sight of a long, bony, familiar figure,
and now it seemed there was no possibility of mistake; and yet he
still went on hoping that this tall man taking off his fur cloak
and coughing was not his brother Nikolay.

Levin loved his brother, but being with him was always a torture.
Just now, when Levin, under the influence of the thoughts that
had come to him, and Agafea Mihalovna's hint, was in a troubled
and uncertain humor, the meeting with his brother that he had to
face seemed particularly difficult.  Instead of a lively, healthy
visitor, some outsider who would, he hoped, cheer him up in his
uncertain humor, he had to see his brother, who knew him through
and through, who would call forth all the thoughts nearest his
heart, would force him to show himself fully.  And that he was
not disposed to do.

Angry with himself for so base a feeling, Levin ran into the
hall; as soon as he had seen his brother close, this feeling of
selfish disappointment vanished instantly and was replaced by
pity.  Terrible as his brother Nikolay had been before in his
emaciation and sickliness, now he looked still more emaciated,
still more wasted.  He was a skeleton covered with skin.

He stood in the hall, jerking his long thin neck, and pulling the
scarf off it, and smiled a strange and pitiful smile.  When he
saw that smile, submissive and humble, Levin felt something
clutching at his throat.

"You see, I've come to you," said Nikolay in a thick voice, never
for one second taking his eyes off his brother's face.  "I've
been meaning to a long while, but I've been unwell all the time.
Now I'm ever so much better," he said, rubbing his beard with his
big thin hands.

"Yes, yes!" answered Levin.  And he felt still more frightened
when, kissing him, he felt with his lips the dryness of his
brother's skin and saw close to him his big eyes, full of a
strange light.

A few weeks before, Konstantin Levin had written to his brother
that through the sale of the small part of the property, that had
remained undivided, there was a sum of about two thousand roubles
to come to him as his share.

Nikolay said that he had come now to take this money and, what
was more important, to stay a while in the old nest, to get in
touch with the earth, so as to renew his strength like the heroes
of old for the work that lay before him.  In spite of his
exaggerated stoop, and the emaciation that was so striking from
his height, his movements were as rapid and abrupt as ever.
Levin led him into his study.

His brother dressed with particular care--a thing he never used
to do--combed his scanty, lank hair, and, smiling, went
upstairs.

He was in the most affectionate and good-humored mood, just as
Levin often remembered him in childhood.  He even referred to
Sergey Ivanovitch without rancor.  When he saw Agafea Mihalovna,
he made jokes with her and asked after the old servants.  The
news of the death of Parfen Denisitch made a painful impression
on him.  A look of fear crossed his face, but he regained his
serenity immediately.

"Of course he was quite old," he said, and changed the subject.
"Well, I'll spend a month or two with you, and then I'm off to
Moscow.  Do you know, Myakov has promised me a place there, and
I'm going into the service.  Now I'm going to arrange my life
quite differently," he went on.  "You know I got rid of that
woman."

"Marya Nikolaevna?  Why, what for?"

"Oh, she was a horrid woman!  She caused me all sorts of
worries."  But he did not say what the annoyances were.  He could
not say that he had cast off Marya Nikolaevna because the tea was
weak, and, above all, because she would look after him, as though
he were an invalid.

"Besides, I want to turn over a new leaf completely now.  I've
done silly things, of course, like everyone else, but money's
the last consideration; I don't regret it.  So long as there's
health, and my health, thank God, is quite restored."

Levin listened and racked his brains, but could think of nothing
to say.  Nikolay probably felt the same; he began questioning his
brother about his affairs; and Levin was glad to talk about
himself, because then he could speak without hypocrisy.  He told
his brother of his plans and his doings.

His brother listened, but evidently he was not interested by it.

These two men were so akin, so near each other, that the
slightest gesture, the tone of voice, told both more than could
be said in words.

Both of them now had only one thought--the illness of Nikolay
and the nearness of his death--which stifled all else.  But
neither of them dared to speak of it, and so whatever they said--
not uttering the one thought that filled their minds--was all
falsehood.  Never had Levin been so glad when the evening was
over and it was time to go to bed.  Never with any outside
person, never on any official visit had he been so unnatural and
false as he was that evening.  And the consciousness of this
unnaturalness, and the remorse he felt at it, made him even
more unnatural.  He wanted to weep over his dying, dearly loved
brother, and he had to listen and keep on talking of how he meant
to live.

As the house was damp, and only one bedroom had been kept heated,
Levin put his brother to sleep in his own bedroom behind a
screen.

His brother got into bed, and whether he slept or did not sleep,
tossed about like a sick man, coughed, and when he could not get
his throat clear, mumbled something.  Sometimes when his
breathing was painful, he said, "Oh, my God!"  Sometimes when he
was choking he muttered angrily, "Ah, the devil!"  Levin could
not sleep for a long while, hearing him.  His thoughts were of
the most various, but the end of all his thoughts was the same--
death.  Death, the inevitable end of all, for the first time
presented itself to him with irresistible force.  And death,
which was here in this loved brother, groaning half asleep and
from habit calling without distinction on God and the devil, was
not so remote as it had hitherto seemed to him.  It was in
himself too, he felt that.  If not today, tomorrow, if not
tomorrow, in thirty years, wasn't it all the same!  And what was
this inevitable death--he did not know, had never thought about
it, and what was more, had not the power, had not the courage to
think about it.

"I work, I want to do something, but I had forgotten it must
all end; I had forgotten--death."

He sat on his bed in the darkness, crouched up, hugging his
knees, and holding his breath from the strain of thought, he
pondered.  But the more intensely he thought, the clearer it
became to him that it was indubitably so, that in reality,
looking upon life, he had forgotten one little fact--that death
will come, and all ends; that nothing was even worth beginning,
and that there was no helping it anyway.  Yes, it was awful, but
it was so.

"But I am alive still.  Now what's to be done? what's to be
done?" he said in despair.  He lighted a candle, got up
cautiously and went to the looking-glass, and began looking at
his face and hair.  Yes, there were gray hairs about his temples.
He opened his mouth.  His back teeth were beginning to decay.  He
bared his muscular arms.  Yes, there was strength in them.  But
Nikolay, who lay there breathing with what was left of lungs, had
had a strong, healthy body too.  And suddenly he recalled how
they used to go to bed together as children, and how they only
waited till Fyodor Bogdanitch was out of the room to fling
pillows at each other and laugh, laugh irrepressibly, so that
even their awe of Fyodor Bogdanitch could not check the
effervescing, overbrimming sense of life and happiness.  "And now
that bent, hollow chest...and I, not knowing what will become of
me, or wherefore..."

"K...ha!  K...ha!  Damnation!  Why do you keep fidgeting, why
don't you go to sleep?" his brother's voice called to him.

"Oh, I don't know, I'm not sleepy."

"I have had a good sleep, I'm not in a sweat now.  Just see, feel
my shirt; it's not wet, is it?"

Levin felt, withdrew behind the screen, and put out the candle,
but for a long while he could not sleep.  The question how to
live had hardly begun to grow a little clearer to him, when a
new, insoluble question presented itself--death.

"Why, he's dying--yes, he'll die in the spring, and how help
him?  What can I say to him?  What do I know about it?  I'd even
forgotten that it was at all."



Chapter 32


Levin had long before made the observation that when one is
uncomfortable with people from their being excessively amenable
and meek, one is apt very soon after to find things intolerable
from their touchiness and irritability.  He felt that this was
how it would be with his brother.  And his brother Nikolay's
gentleness did in fact not last out for long.  The very next
morning he began to be irritable, and seemed doing his best to
find fault with his brother, attacking him on his tenderest
points.

Levin felt himself to blame, and could not set things right.  He
felt that if they had both not kept up appearances, but had
spoken, as it is called, from the heart--that is to say, had
said only just what they were thinking and feeling--they would
simply have looked into each other's faces, and Konstantin could
only have said, "You're dying, you're dying!" and Nikolay could
only have answered, "I know I'm dying, but I'm afraid, I'm
afraid, I'm afraid!"  And they could have said nothing more, if
they had said only what was in their hearts.  But life like that
was impossible, and so Konstantin tried to do what he had been
trying to do all his life, and never could learn to do, though,
as far as he could observe, many people knew so well how to do
it, and without it there was no living at all.  He tried to say
what he was not thinking, but he felt continually that it had a
ring of falsehood, that his brother detected him in it, and was
exasperated at it.

The third day Nikolay induced his brother to explain his plan to
him again, and began not merely attacking it, but intentionally
confounding it with communism.

"You've simply borrowed an idea that's not your own, but you've
distorted it, and are trying to apply it where it's not
applicable."

"But I tell you it's nothing to do with it.  They deny the
justice of property, of capital, of inheritance, while I do not
deny this chief stimulus."  (Levin felt disgusted himself at
using such expressions, but ever since he had been engrossed by
his work, he had unconsciously come more and more frequently to
use words not Russian.)  "All I want is to regulate labor."

"Which means, you've borrowed an idea, stripped it of all that
gave it its force, and want to make believe that it's something
new," said Nikolay, angrily tugging at his necktie.

"But my idea has nothing in common..."

"That, anyway," said Nikolay Levin, with an ironical smile, his
eyes flashing malignantly, "has the charm of--what's one to call
it?--geometrical symmetry, of clearness, of definiteness.  It
may be a Utopia.  But if once one allows the possibility of
making of all the past a _tabula rasa_--no property, no family--
then labor would organize itself.  But you gain nothing..."

"Why do you mix things up? I've never been a communist."

"But I have, and I consider it's premature, but rational, and
it has a future, just like Christianity in its first ages."

"All that I maintain is that the labor force ought to be
investigated from the point of view of natural science; that is
to say, it ought to be studied, its qualities ascertained..."

"But that's utter waste of time.  That force finds a certain form
of activity of itself, according to the stage of its development.
There have been slaves first everywhere, then metayers; and we
have the half-crop system, rent, and day laborers.  What are you
trying to find?"

Levin suddenly lost his temper at these words, because at the
bottom of his heart he was afraid that it was true--true that he
was trying to hold the balance even between communism and the
familiar forms, and that this was hardly possible.

"I am trying to find means of working productively for myself and
for the laborers.  I want to organize..." he answered hotly.

"You don't want to organize anything; it's simply just as you've
been all your life, that you want to be original to pose as not
exploiting the peasants simply, but with some idea in view."

"Oh, all right, that's what you think--and let me alone!"
answered Levin, feeling the muscles of his left cheek twitching
uncontrollably.

"You've never had, and never have, convictions; all you want is
to please your vanity."

"Oh, very well; then let me alone!"

"And I will let you alone! and it's high time I did, and go to
the devil with you! and I'm very sorry I ever came!"

In spite of all Levin's efforts to soothe his brother afterwards,
Nikolay would listen to nothing he said, declaring that it was
better to part, and Konstantin saw that it simply was that life
was unbearable to him.

Nikolay was just getting ready to go, when Konstantin went in to
him again and begged him, rather unnaturally, to forgive him if
he had hurt his feelings in any way.

"Ah, generosity!" said Nikolay, and he smiled.  "If you want to
be right, I can give you that satisfaction.  You're in the right;
but I'm going all the same."

It was only just at parting that Nikolay kissed him, and said,
looking with sudden strangeness and seriousness at his brother:

"Anyway, don't remember evil against me, Kostya!" and his voice
quivered.  These were the only words that had been spoken
sincerely between them.  Levin knew that those words meant, "You
see, and you know, that I'm in a bad way, and maybe we shall not
see each other again."  Levin knew this, and the tears gushed
from his eyes.  He kissed his brother once more, but he could not
speak, and knew not what to say.

Three days after his brother's departure, Levin too set off for
his foreign tour.  Happening to meet Shtcherbatsky, Kitty's
cousin, in the railway train, Levin greatly astonished him by his
depression.

"What's the matter with you?" Shtcherbatsky asked him.

"Oh, nothing; there's not much happiness in life."

"Not much? You come with me to Paris instead of to Mulhausen.
You shall see how to be happy."

"No, I've done with it all.  It's time I was dead."

"Well, that's a good one!" said Shtcherbatsky, laughing; "why,
I'm only just getting ready to begin."

"Yes, I thought the same not long ago, but now I know I shall
soon be dead."

Levin said what he had genuinely been thinking of late.  He saw
nothing but death or the advance towards death in everything.
But his cherished scheme only engrossed him the more.  Life had
to be got through somehow till death did come.  Darkness had
fallen upon everything for him; but just because of this darkness
he felt that the one guiding clue in the darkness was his work,
and he clutched it and clung to it with all his strength.






PART 4





Chapter 1


The Karenins, husband and wife, continued living in the same
house, met every day, but were complete strangers to one another.
Alexey Alexandrovitch made it a rule to see his wife every day,
so that the servants might have no grounds for suppositions, but
avoided dining at home.  Vronsky was never at Alexey
Alexandrovitch's house, but Anna saw him away from home, and her
husband was aware of it.

The position was one of misery for all three; and not one of them
would have been equal to enduring this position for a single day,
if it had not been for the expectation that it would change, that
it was merely a temporary painful ordeal which would pass over.
Alexey Alexandrovitch hoped that this passion would pass, as
everything does pass, that everyone would forget about it, and
his name would remain unsullied.  Anna, on whom the position
depended, and for whom it was more miserable than for anyone,
endured it because she not merely hoped, but firmly believed,
that it would all very soon be settled and come right.  She had
not the least idea what would settle the position, but she firmly
believed that something would very soon turn up now.  Vronsky,
against his own will or wishes, followed her lead, hoped too that
something, apart from his own action, would be sure to solve all
difficulties.

In the middle of the winter Vronsky spent a very tiresome week.
A foreign prince, who had come on a visit to Petersburg, was put
under his charge, and he had to show him the sights worth seeing.
Vronsky was of distinguished appearance; he possessed, moreover,
the art of behaving with respectful dignity, and was used to
having to do with such grand personages--that was how he came to
be put in charge of the prince.  But he felt his duties very
irksome.  The prince was anxious to miss nothing of which he
would be asked at home, had he seen that in Russia?  And on his
own account he was anxious to enjoy to the utmost all Russian
forms of amusement.  Vronsky was obliged to be his guide in
satisfying both these inclinations.  The mornings they spent
driving to look at places of interest; the evenings they passed
enjoying the national entertainments.  The prince rejoiced in
health exceptional even among princes.  By gymnastics and careful
attention to his health he had brought himself to such a point
that in spite of his excess in pleasure he looked as fresh as a
big glossy green Dutch cucumber.  The prince had traveled a great
deal, and considered one of the chief advantages of modern
facilities of communication was the accessibility of the
pleasures of all nations.

He had been in Spain, and there had indulged in serenades and had
made friends with a Spanish girl who played the mandolin.  In
Switzerland he had killed chamois.  In England he had galloped in
a red coat over hedges and killed two hundred pheasants for a
bet.  In Turkey he had got into a harem; in India he had hunted
on an elephant, and now in Russia he wished to taste all the
specially Russian forms of pleasure.

Vronsky, who was, as it were, chief master of the ceremonies to
him, was at great pains to arrange all the Russian amusements
suggested by various persons to the prince.  They had race
horses, and Russian pancakes and bear hunts and three-horse
sledges, and gypsies and drinking feasts, with the Russian
accompaniment of broken crockery.  And the prince with surprising
ease fell in with the Russian spirit, smashed trays full of
crockery, sat with a gypsy girl on his knee, and seemed to be
asking--what more, and does the whole Russian spirit consist in
just this?

In reality, of all the Russian entertainments the prince liked
best French actresses and ballet dancers and white-seal
champagne.  Vronsky was used to princes, but, either because he
had himself changed of late, or that he was in too close
proximity to the prince, that week seemed fearfully wearisome to
him.  The whole of that week he experienced a sensation such as a
man might have set in charge of a dangerous madman, afraid of the
madman, and at the same time, from being with him, fearing for
his own reason.  Vronsky was continually conscious of the
necessity of never for a second relaxing the tone of stern
official respectfulness, that he might not himself be insulted.
The prince's manner of treating the very people who, to Vronsky's
surprise, were ready to descend to any depths to provide him with
Russian amusements, was contemptuous.  His criticisms of Russian
women, whom he wished to study, more than once made Vronsky
crimson with indignation.  The chief reason why the prince was so
particularly disagreeable to Vronsky was that he could not help
seeing himself in him.  And what he saw in this mirror did not
gratify his self-esteem.  He was a very stupid and very
self-satisfied and very healthy and very well-washed man, and
nothing else.  He was a gentleman--that was true, and Vronsky
could not deny it.  He was equable and not cringing with his
superiors, was free and ingratiating in his behavior with his
equals, and was contemptuously indulgent with his inferiors.
Vronsky was himself the same, and regarded it as a great merit to
be so.  But for this prince he was an inferior, and his
contemptuous and indulgent attitude to him revolted him.

"Brainless beef! can I be like that?" he thought.

Be that as it might, when, on the seventh day, he parted from the
prince, who was starting for Moscow, and received his thanks, he
was happy to be rid of his uncomfortable position and the
unpleasant reflection of himself.  He said good-bye to him at the
station on their return from a bear hunt, at which they had had a
display of Russian prowess kept up all night.



Chapter 2


When he got home, Vronsky found there a note from Anna.  She
wrote, "I am ill and unhappy.  I cannot come out, but I cannot go
on longer without seeing you.  Come in this evening.  Alexey
Alexandrovitch goes to the council at seven and will be there
till ten."  Thinking for an instant of the strangeness of her
bidding him come straight to her, in spite of her husband's
insisting on her not receiving him, he decided to go.

Vronsky had that winter got his promotion, was now a colonel, had
left the regimental quarters, and was living alone.  After having
some lunch, he lay down on the sofa immediately, and in five
minutes memories of the hideous scenes he had witnessed during
the last few days were confused together and joined on to a
mental image of Anna and of the peasant who had played an
important part in the bear hunt, and Vronsky fell asleep.  He
waked up in the dark, trembling with horror, and made haste to
light a candle.  "What was it?  What?  What was the dreadful
thing I dreamed?  Yes, yes; I think a little dirty man with a
disheveled beard was stooping down doing something, and all of a
sudden he began saying some strange words in French.  Yes, there
was nothing else in the dream," he said to himself.  "But why was
it so awful?"  He vividly recalled the peasant again and those
incomprehensible French words the peasant had uttered, and a
chill of horror ran down his spine.

"What nonsense!" thought Vronsky, and glanced at his watch.

It was half-past eight already.  He rang up his servant, dressed
in haste, and went out onto the steps, completely forgetting the
dream and only worried at being late.  As he drove up to the
Karenins' entrance he looked at his watch and saw it was ten
minutes to nine.  A high, narrow carriage with a pair of grays
was standing at the entrance.  He recognized Anna's carriage.
"She is coming to me," thought Vronsky, "and better she should.
I don't like going into that house.  But no matter; I can't hide
myself," he thought, and with that manner peculiar to him from
childhood, as of a man who has nothing to be ashamed of, Vronsky
got out of his sledge and went to the door.  The door opened, and
the hall porter with a rug on his arm called the carriage.
Vronsky, though he did not usually notice details, noticed at
this moment the amazed expression with which the porter glanced
at him.  In the very doorway Vronsky almost ran up against Alexey
Alexandrovitch.  The gas jet threw its full light on the
bloodless, sunken face under the black hat and on the white
cravat, brilliant against the beaver of the coat.  Karenin's
fixed, dull eyes were fastened upon Vronsky's face.  Vronsky
bowed, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, chewing his lips, lifted his
hand to his hat and went on.  Vronsky saw him without looking
round get into the carriage, pick up the rug and the opera-glass
at the window and disappear.  Vronsky went into the hall.  His
brows were scowling, and his eyes gleamed with a proud and angry
light in them.

"What a position!" he thought.  "If he would fight, would stand
up for his honor, I could act, could express my feelings; but
this weakness or baseness....  He puts me in the position of
playing false, which I never meant and never mean to do."

Vronsky's ideas had changed since the day of his conversation
with Anna in the Vrede garden.  Unconsciously yielding to the
weakness of Anna--who had surrendered herself up to him utterly,
and simply looked to him to decide her fate, ready to submit to
anything--he had long ceased to think that their tie might end
as he had thought then.  His ambitious plans had retreated into
the background again, and feeling that he had got out of that
circle of activity in which everything was definite, he had given
himself entirely to his passion, and that passion was binding him
more and more closely to her.

He was still in the hall when he caught the sound of her
retreating footsteps.  He knew she had been expecting him, had
listened for him, and was now going back to the drawing room.

"No," she cried, on seeing him, and at the first sound of her
voice the tears came into her eyes.  "No; if things are to go on
like this, the end will come much, much too soon."

"What is it, dear one?"

"What?  I've been waiting in agony for an hour, two hours...No,
I won't...I can't quarrel with you.  Of course you couldn't
come.  No, I won't."  She laid her two hands on his shoulders,
and looked a long while at him with a profound, passionate, and
at the same time searching look.  She was studying his face to
make up for the time she had not seen him.  She was, every time
she saw him, making the picture of him in her imagination
(incomparably superior, impossible in reality) fit with him as he
really was.



Chapter 3


"You met him?" she asked, when they had sat down at the table in
the lamplight.  "You're punished, you see, for being late."

"Yes; but how was it?  Wasn't he to be at the council?"

"He had been and come back, and was going out somewhere again.
But that's no matter.  Don't talk about it.  Where have you been?
With the prince still?"

She knew every detail of his existence.  He was going to say that
he had been up all night and had dropped asleep, but looking at
her thrilled and rapturous face, he was ashamed.  And he said he
had had to go to report on the prince's departure.

"But it's over now?  He is gone?"

"Thank God it's over!  You wouldn't believe how insufferable it's
been for me."

"Why so?  Isn't it the life all of you, all young men, always
lead?" she said, knitting her brows; and taking up the crochet
work that was lying on the table, she began drawing the hook out
of it, without looking at Vronsky.

"I gave that life up long ago," said he, wondering at the change
in her face, and trying to divine its meaning.  "And I confess,"
he said, with a smile, showing his thick, white teeth, "this week
I've been, as it were, looking at myself in a glass, seeing that
life, and I didn't like it."

She held the work in her hands, but did not crochet, and looked
at him with strange, shining, and hostile eyes.

"This morning Liza came to see me--they're not afraid to call on
me, in spite of the Countess Lidia Ivanovna," she put in--"and
she told me about your Athenian evening.  How loathsome!"

"I was just going to say..."

She interrupted him.  "It was that Thèrése you used to know?"

"I was just saying..."

"How disgusting you are, you men!  How is it you can't understand
that a woman can never forget that," she said, getting more and
more angry, and so letting him see the cause of her irritation,
"especially a woman who cannot know your life?  What do I know?
What have I ever known?" she said, "what you tell me.  And how
do I know whether you tell me the truth?..."

"Anna, you hurt me.  Don't you trust me?  Haven't I told you that
I haven't a thought I wouldn't lay bare to you?"

"Yes, yes," she said, evidently trying to suppress her jealous
thoughts.  "But if only you knew how wretched I am!  I believe
you, I believe you....  What were you saying?"

But he could not at once recall what he had been going to say.
These fits of jealousy, which of late had been more and more
frequent with her, horrified him, and however much he tried to
disguise the fact, made him feel cold to her, although he knew
the cause of her jealousy was her love for him.  How often he had
told himself that her love was happiness; and now she loved him
as a woman can love when love has outweighed for her all the good
things of life--and he was much further from happiness than when
he had followed her from Moscow.  Then he had thought himself
unhappy, but happiness was before him; now he felt that the best
happiness was already left behind.  She was utterly unlike what
she had been when he first saw her.  Both morally and physically
she had changed for the worse.  She had broadened out all over,
and in her face at the time when she was speaking of the actress
there was an evil expression of hatred that distorted it.  He
looked at her as a man looks at a faded flower he has gathered,
with difficulty recognizing in it the beauty for which he picked
and ruined it.  And in spite of this he felt that then, when his
love was stronger, he could, if he had greatly wished it, have
torn that love out of his heart; but now, when as at that moment
it seemed to him he felt no love for her, he knew that what bound
him to her could not be broken.

"Well, well, what was it you were going to say about the prince?
I have driven away the fiend," she added.  The fiend was the
name they had given her jealousy.  "What did you begin to tell me
about the prince?  Why did you find it so tiresome?"

"Oh, it was intolerable!" he said, trying to pick up the thread
of his interrupted thought.  "He does not improve on closer
acquaintance.  If you want him defined, here he is: a prime,
well-fed beast such as takes medals at the cattle shows, and
nothing more," he said, with a tone of vexation that interested
her.

"No; how so?" she replied.  "He's seen a great deal, anyway; he's
cultured?"

"It's an utterly different culture--their culture.  He's
cultivated, one sees, simply to be able to despise culture, as
they despise everything but animal pleasures."

"But don't you all care for these animal pleasures?" she said,
and again he noticed a dark look in her eyes that avoided him.

"How is it you're defending him?" he said, smiling.

"I'm not defending him, it's nothing to me; but I imagine, if you
had not cared for those pleasures yourself, you might have got
out of them.  But if it affords you satisfaction to gaze at
Thèrése in the attire of Eve..."

"Again, the devil again," Vronsky said, taking the hand she had
laid on the table and kissing it.

"Yes; but I can't help it.  You don't know what I have suffered
waiting for you.  I believe I'm not jealous.  I'm not jealous: I
believe you when you're here; but when you're away somewhere
leading your life, so incomprehensible to me..."

She turned away from him, pulled the hook at last out of the
crochet work, and rapidly, with the help of her forefinger, began
working loop after loop of the wool that was dazzling white in
the lamplight, while the slender wrist moved swiftly, nervously
in the embroidered cuff.

"How was it, then?  Where did you meet Alexey Alexandrovitch?"
Her voice sounded in an unnatural and jarring tone.

"We ran up against each other in the doorway."

"And he bowed to you like this?"

She drew a long face, and half-closing her eyes, quickly
transformed her expression, folded her hands, and Vronsky
suddenly saw in her beautiful face the very expression with which
Alexey Alexandrovitch had bowed to him.  He smiled, while she
laughed gaily, with that sweet, deep laugh, which was one of her
greatest charms.

"I don't understand him in the least," said Vronsky.  "If after
your avowal to him at your country house he had broken with you,
if he had called me out--but this I can't understand.  How can he
put up with such a position?  He feels it, that's evident."

"He?" she said sneeringly.  "He's perfectly satisfied."

"What are we all miserable for, when everything might be so
happy?"

"Only not he.  Don't I know him, the falsity in which he's
utterly steeped?...  Could one, with any feeling, live as he is
living with me?  He understands nothing, and feels nothing.
Could a man of any feeling live in the same house with his
unfaithful wife?  Could he talk to her, call her 'my dear'?"

And again she could not help mimicking him: "'Anna, _ma chère_;
Anna, dear'!"

"He's not a man, not a human being--he's a doll!  No one knows
him; but I know him.  Oh, if I'd been in his place, I'd long ago
have killed, have torn to pieces a wife like me.  I wouldn't
have said, 'Anna, ma chere'!  He's not a man, he's an official
machine.  He doesn't understand that I'm your wife, that he's
outside, that he's superfluous....  Don't let's talk of him!..."

"You're unfair, very unfair, dearest," said Vronsky, trying to
soothe her.  "But never mind, don't let's talk of him.  Tell me
what you've been doing?  What is the matter?  What has been wrong
with you, and what did the doctor say?"

She looked at him with mocking amusement.  Evidently she had hit
on other absurd and grotesque aspects in her husband and was
awaiting the moment to give expression to them.

But he went on:

"I imagine that it's not illness, but your condition.  When will
it be?"

The ironical light died away in her eyes, but a different smile,
a consciousness of something, he did not know what, and of quiet
melancholy, came over her face.

"Soon, soon.  You say that our position is miserable, that we
must put an end to it.  If you knew how terrible it is to me,
what I would give to be able to love you freely and boldly!  I
should not torture myself and torture you with my jealousy....
And it will come soon, but not as we expect."

And at the thought of how it would come, she seemed so pitiable
to herself that tears came into her eyes, and she could not go
on.  She laid her hand on his sleeve, dazzling and white with its
rings in the lamplight.

"It won't come as we suppose.  I didn't mean to say this to you,
but you've made me.  Soon, soon, all will be over, and we shall
all, all be at peace, and suffer no more."

"I don't understand," he said, understanding her.

"You asked when?  Soon.  And I shan't live through it.  Don't
interrupt me!" and she made haste to speak.  "I know it; I know
for certain.  I shall die; and I'm very glad I shall die, and
release myself and you."

Tears dropped from her eyes; he bent down over her hand and began
kissing it, trying to hide his emotion, which, he knew, had no
sort of grounds, though he could not control it.

"Yes, it's better so," she said, tightly gripping his hand.
"That's the only way, the only way left us."

He had recovered himself, and lifted his head.

"How absurd!  What absurd nonsense you are talking!"

"No, it's the truth."

"What, what's the truth?"

"That I shall die.  I have had a dream."

"A dream?" repeated Vronsky, and instantly he recalled the
peasant of his dream.

"Yes, a dream," she said.  "It's a long while since I dreamed it.
I dreamed that I ran into my bedroom, that I had to get something
there, to find out something; you know how it is in dreams," she
said, her eyes wide with horror; "and in the bedroom, in the
corner, stood something."

"Oh, what nonsense!  How can you believe..."

But she would not let him interrupt her.  What she was saying was
too important to her.

"And the something turned round, and I saw it was a peasant with
a disheveled beard, little, and dreadful looking.  I wanted to
run away, but he bent down over a sack, and was fumbling there
with his hands..."

She showed how he had moved his hands.  There was terror in her
face.  And Vronsky, remembering his dream, felt the same terror
filling his soul.

"He was fumbling and kept talking quickly, quickly in French, you
know: _Il faut le battre, le fer, le brayer, le pétrir_....  And in
my horror I tried to wake up, and woke up...but woke up in
the dream.  And I began asking myself what it meant.  And Korney
said to me: 'In childbirth you'll die, ma'am, you'll die....'
And I woke up."

"What nonsense, what nonsense!" said Vronsky; but he felt himself
that there was no conviction in his voice.

"But don't let's talk of it.  Ring the bell, I'll have tea.  And
stay a little now; it's not long I shall..."

But all at once she stopped.  The expression of her face
instantaneously changed.  Horror and excitement were suddenly
replaced by a look of soft, solemn, blissful attention.  He could
not comprehend the meaning of the change.  She was listening to
the stirring of the new life within her.



Chapter 4


Alexey Alexandrovitch, after meeting Vronsky on his own steps,
drove, as he had intended, to the Italian opera.  He sat
through two acts there, and saw everyone he had wanted to see.
On returning home, he carefully scrutinized the hat stand, and
noticing that there was not a military overcoat there, he went,
as usual, to his own room.  But, contrary to his usual habit, he
did not go to bed, he walked up and down his study till three
o'clock in the morning.  The feeling of furious anger with his
wife, who would not observe the proprieties and keep to the one
stipulation he had laid on her, not to receive her lover in her
own home, gave him no peace.  She had not complied with his
request, and he was bound to punish her and carry out his
threat--obtain a divorce and take away his son.  He knew all the
difficulties connected with this course, but he had said he would
do it, and now he must carry out his threat.  Countess Lidia
Ivanovna had hinted that this was the best way out of his
position, and of late the obtaining of divorces had been brought
to such perfection that Alexey Alexandrovitch saw a possibility
of overcoming the formal difficulties.  Misfortunes never come
singly, and the affairs of the reorganization of the native
tribes, and of the irrigation of the lands of the Zaraisky
province, had brought such official worries upon Alexey
Alexandrovitch that he had been of late in a continual condition
of extreme irritability.

He did not sleep the whole night, and his fury, growing in a sort
of vast, arithmetical progression, reached its highest limits in
the morning.  He dressed in haste, and as though carrying his cup
full of wrath, and fearing to spill any over, fearing to lose
with his wrath the energy necessary for the interview with his
wife, he went into her room directly he heard she was up.

Anna, who had thought she knew her husband so well, was amazed at
his appearance when he went in to her.  His brow was lowering,
and his eyes stared darkly before him, avoiding her eyes; his
mouth was tightly and contemptuously shut.  In his walk, in his
gestures, in the sound of his voice there was a determination and
firmness such as his wife had never seen in him.  He went into
her room, and without greeting her, walked straight up to her
writing-table, and taking her keys, opened a drawer.

"What do you want?" she cried.

"Your  lover's letters," he said.

"They're not here," she said, shutting the drawer; but from that
action he saw he had guessed right, and roughly pushing away her
hand, he quickly snatched a portfolio in which he knew she used
to put her most important papers.  She tried to pull the
portfolio away, but he pushed her back.

"Sit down!  I have to speak to you," he said, putting the
portfolio under his arm, and squeezing it so tightly with his
elbow that his shoulder stood up.  Amazed and intimidated, she
gazed at him in silence.

"I told you that I would not allow you to receive your lover in
this house."

"I had to see him to..."

She stopped, not finding a reason.

"I do not enter into the details of why a woman wants to see her
lover."

"I meant, I only..." she said, flushing hotly.  This coarseness
of his angered her, and gave her courage.  "Surely you must feel
how easy it is for you to insult me?" she said.

"An honest man and an honest woman may be insulted, but to tell a
thief he's a thief is simply _la constatation d'un fait_."

"This cruelty is something new I did not know in you."

"You call it cruelty for a husband to give his wife liberty,
giving her the honorable protection of his name, simply on the
condition of observing the proprieties: is that cruelty?"

"It's worse than cruel--it's base, if you want to know!" Anna
cried, in a rush of hatred, and getting up, she was going away.

"No!" he shrieked, in his shrill voice, which pitched a note
higher than usual even, and his big hands clutching her by the
arm so violently that red marks were left from the bracelet he
was squeezing, he forcibly sat her down in her place.

"Base!  If you care to use that word, what is base is to forsake
husband and child for a lover, while you eat your husband's
bread!"

She bowed her head.  She did not say what she had said the
evening before to her lover, that _he_ was her husband, and her
husband was superfluous; she did not even think that.  She felt
all the justice of his words, and only said softly:

"You cannot describe my position as worse than I feel it to be
myself; but what are you saying all this for?"

"What am I saying it for? what for?" he went on, as angrily.
"That you may know that since you have not carried out my wishes
in regard to observing outward decorum, I will take measures to
put an end to this state of things."

"Soon, very soon, it will end, anyway," she said; and again, at
the thought of death near at hand and now desired, tears came
into her eyes.

"It will end sooner than you and your lover have planned!  If you
must have the satisfaction of animal passion..."

"Alexey Alexandrovitch!  I won't say it's not generous, but it's
not like a gentleman to strike anyone who's down."

"Yes, you only think of yourself!  But the sufferings of a man
who was your husband have no interest for you.  You don't care
that his whole life is ruined, that he is thuff...thuff..."

Alexey Alexandrovitch was speaking so quickly that he stammered,
and was utterly unable to articulate the word "suffering."  In
the end he pronounced it "thuffering."  She wanted to laugh, and
was immediately ashamed that anything could amuse her at such a
moment.  And for the first time, for an instant, she felt for
him, put herself in his place, and was sorry for him.  But what
could she say or do?  Her head sank, and she sat silent.  He too
was silent for some time, and then began speaking in a frigid,
less shrill voice, emphasizing random words that had no
special significance.

"I came to tell you..." he said.

She glanced at him.  "No, it was my fancy," she thought,
recalling the expression of his face when he stumbled over the
word "suffering."  "No; can a man with those dull eyes, with that
self-satisfied complacency, feel anything?"

"I cannot change anything," she whispered.

"I have come to tell you that I am going tomorrow to Moscow, and
shall not return again to this house, and you will receive notice
of what I decide through the lawyer into whose hands I shall
intrust the task of getting a divorce.  My son is going to my
sister's," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, with an effort recalling
what he had meant to say about his son.

"You take Seryozha to hurt me," she said, looking at him from
under her brows.  "You do not love him....  Leave me Seryozha!"

"Yes, I have lost even my affection for my son, because he is
associated with the repulsion I feel for you.  But still I
shall take him.  Goodbye!"

And he was going away, but now she detained him.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, leave me Seryozha!" she whispered once
more.  "I have nothing else to say.  Leave Seryozha till my...I
shall soon be confined; leave him!"

Alexey Alexandrovitch flew into a rage, and, snatching his hand
from her, he went out of the room without a word.



Chapter 5


The waiting-room of the celebrated Petersburg lawyer was full
when Alexey Alexandrovitch entered it.  Three ladies--an old
lady, a young lady, and a merchant's wife--and three gentlemen--
one a German banker with a ring on his finger, the second a
merchant with a beard, and the third a wrathful-looking
government clerk in official uniform, with a cross on his neck--
had obviously been waiting a long while already.  Two clerks were
writing at tables with scratching pens.  The appurtenances of the
writing-tables, about which Alexey Alexandrovitch was himself
very fastidious, were exceptionally good.  He could not help
observing this.  One of the clerks, without getting up, turned
wrathfully to Alexey Alexandrovitch, half closing his eyes.
"What are you wanting?"

He replied that he had to see the lawyer on some business.

"He is engaged," the clerk responded severely, and he pointed
with his pen at the persons waiting, and went on writing.

"Can't he spare time to see me?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"He has no time free; he is always busy.  Kindly wait your
turn."

"Then I must trouble you to give him my card," Alexey
Alexandrovitch said with dignity, seeing the impossibility of
preserving his incognito.

The clerk took the card and, obviously not approving of what he
read on it, went to the door.

Alexey Alexandrovitch was in principle in favor of the publicity
of legal proceedings, though for some higher official
considerations he disliked the application of the principle in
Russia, and disapproved of it, as far as he could disapprove of
anything instituted by authority of the Emperor.  His whole life
had been spent in administrative work, and consequently, when he
did not approve of anything, his disapproval was softened by the
recognition of the inevitability of mistakes and the possibility
of reform in every department.  In the new public law courts he
disliked the restrictions laid on the lawyers conducting cases.
But till then he had had nothing to do with the law courts, and
so had disapproved of their publicity simply in theory; now his
disapprobation was strengthened by the unpleasant impression made
on him in the lawyer's waiting room.

"Coming immediately," said the clerk; and two minutes later there
did actually appear in the doorway the large figure of an old
solicitor who had been consulting with the lawyer himself.

The lawyer was a little, squat, bald man, with a dark, reddish
beard, light-colored long eyebrows, and an overhanging brow.  He
was attired as though for a wedding, from his cravat to his
double watch-chain and varnished boots.  His face was clever and
manly, but his dress was dandified and in bad taste.

"Pray walk in," said the lawyer, addressing Alexey
Alexandrovitch; and, gloomily ushering Karenin in before him, he
closed the door.

"Won't you sit down?" He indicated an armchair at a writing table
covered with papers.  He sat down himself, and, rubbing his
little hands with short fingers covered with white hairs, he bent
his head on one side.  But as soon as he was settled in this
position a moth flew over the table.  The lawyer, with a
swiftness that could never have been expected of him, opened his
hands, caught the moth, and resumed his former attitude.

"Before beginning to speak of my business," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, following the lawyer's movements with wondering
eyes, "I ought to observe that the business about which I have to
speak to you is to be strictly private."

The lawyer's overhanging reddish mustaches were parted in a
scarcely perceptible smile.

"I should not be a lawyer if I could not keep the secrets
confided to me.  But if you would like proof..."

Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at his face, and saw that the
shrewd, gray eyes were laughing, and seemed to know all about it
already.

"You know my name?" Alexey Alexandrovitch resumed.

"I know you and the good"--again he caught a moth--"work you are
doing, like every Russian," said the lawyer, bowing.

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, plucking up his courage.  But
having once made up his mind he went on in his shrill voice,
without timidity--or hesitation, accentuating here and there a
word.

"I have the misfortune," Alexey Alexandrovitch began, "to have
been deceived in my married life, and I desire to break off all
relations with my wife by legal means--that is, to be divorced,
but to do this so that my son may not remain with his mother."

The lawyer's gray eyes tried not to laugh, but they were dancing
with irrepressible glee, and Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that it
was not simply the delight of a man who has just got a profitable
job: there was triumph and joy, there was a gleam like the
malignant gleam he saw in his wife's eyes.

"You desire my assistance in securing a divorce?"

"Yes, precisely so; but I ought to warn you that I may be
wasting your time and attention.  I have come simply to consult
you as a preliminary step.  I want a divorce, but the form in
which it is possible is of great consequence to me.  It is very
possible that if that form does not correspond with my
requirements I may give up a legal divorce."

"Oh, that's always the case," said the lawyer, "and that's always
for you to decide."

He let his eyes rest on Alexey Alexandrovitch's feet, feeling
that he might offend his client by the sight of his irrepressible
amusement.  He looked at a moth that flew before his nose, and
moved his hands, but did not catch it from regard for Alexey
Alexandrovitch's position.

"Though in their general features our laws on this subject are
known to me," pursued Alexey Alexandrovitch, "I should be glad
to have an idea of the forms in which such things are done in
practice."

"You would be glad," the lawyer, without lifting his eyes,
responded, adopting, with a certain satisfaction, the tone of his
client's remarks, "for me to lay before you all the methods by
which you could secure what you desire?"

And on receiving an assuring nod from Alexey Alexandrovitch, he
went on, stealing a glance now and then at Alexey
Alexandrovitch's face, which was growing red in patches.

"Divorce by our laws," he said, with a slight shade of
disapprobation of our laws, "is possible, as you are aware, in
the following cases....  Wait a little!" he called to a clerk
who put his head in at the door, but he got up all the same, said
a few words to him, and sat down again.  "...In the following
cases: physical defect in the married parties, desertion without
communication for five years," he said, crooking a short finger
covered with hair, "adultery" (this word he pronounced with
obvious satisfaction), "subdivided as follows" (he continued to
crook his fat fingers, though the three cases and their
subdivisions could obviously not be classified together):
"physical defect of the husband or of the wife, adultery of the
husband or of the wife." As by now all his fingers were used up,
he uncrooked all his fingers and went on: "This is the
theoretical view; but I imagine you have done me the honor to
apply to me in order to learn its application in practice.  And
therefore, guided by precedents, I must inform you that in
practice cases of divorce may all be reduced to the following--
there's no physical defect, I may assume, nor desertion?..."

Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed his head in assent.

"--May be reduced to the following: adultery of one of the
married parties, and the detection in the fact of the guilty
party by mutual agreement, and failing such agreement, accidental
detection.  It must be admitted that the latter case is rarely
met with in practice," said the lawyer, and stealing a glance at
Alexey Alexandrovitch he paused, as a man selling pistols, after
enlarging on the advantages of each weapon, might await his
customer's choice.  But Alexey Alexandrovitch said nothing, and
therefore the lawyer went on: "The most usual and simple, the
sensible course, I consider, is adultery by mutual consent.  I
should not permit myself to express it so, speaking with a man of
no education," he said, "but I imagine that to you this is
comprehensible."

Alexey Alexandrovitch was, however, so perturbed that he did not
immediately comprehend all the good sense of adultery by mutual
consent, and his eyes expressed this uncertainty; but the lawyer
promptly came to his assistance.

"People cannot go on living together--here you have a fact.  And
if both are agreed about it, the details and formalities become a
matter of no importance.  And at the same time this is the
simplest and most certain method."

Alexey Alexandrovitch fully understood now.  But he had religious
scruples, which hindered the execution of such a plan.

"That is out of the question in the present case," he said.
"Only one alternative is possible: undesigned detection,
supported by letters which I have."

At the mention of letters the lawyer pursed up his lips, and gave
utterance to a thin little compassionate and contemptuous sound.

"Kindly consider," he began, "cases of that kind are, as you are
aware, under ecclesiastical jurisdiction; the reverend fathers
are fond of going into the minutest details in cases of that
kind," he said with a smile, which betrayed his sympathy with the
reverend fathers' taste.  "Letters may, of course, be a partial
confirmation; but detection in the fact there must be of the most
direct kind, that is, by eyewitnesses.  In fact, if you do me the
honor to intrust your confidence to me, you will do well to leave
me the choice of the measures to be employed.  If one wants the
result, one must admit the means."

"If it is so..." Alexey Alexandrovitch began, suddenly turning
white; but at that moment the lawyer rose and again went to the
door to speak to the intruding clerk.

"Tell her we don't haggle over fees!" he said, and returned to
Alexey Alexandrovitch.

On his way back he caught unobserved another moth.  "Nice state
my rep curtains will be in by the summer!" he thought, frowning.

"And so you were saying?..." he said.

"I will communicate my decision to you by letter," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, getting up, and he clutched at the table.  After
standing a moment in silence, he said: "From your words I may
consequently conclude that a divorce may be obtained?  I would
ask you to let me know what are your terms."

"It may be obtained if you give me complete liberty of action,"
said the lawyer, not answering his question.  "When can I reckon
on receiving information from you?" he asked, moving towards the
door, his eyes and his varnished boots shining.

"In a week's time.  Your answer as to whether you will undertake
to conduct the case, and on what terms, you will be so good as to
communicate to me."

"Very good."

The lawyer bowed respectfully, let his client out of the door,
and, left alone, gave himself up to his sense of amusement.  He
felt so mirthful that, contrary to his rules, he made a reduction
in his terms to the haggling lady, and gave up catching moths,
finally deciding that next winter he must have the furniture
covered with velvet, like Sigonin's.



Chapter 6


Alexey Alexandrovitch had gained a brilliant victory at the
sitting of the Commission of the 17th of August, but in the
sequel this victory cut the ground from under his feet.  The new
commission for the inquiry into the condition of the native
tribes in all its branches had been formed and despatched to its
destination with an unusual speed and energy inspired by Alexey
Alexandrovitch.  Within three months a report was presented.  The
condition of the native tribes was investigated in its political,
administrative, economic, ethnographic, material, and religious
aspects.  To all these questions there were answers admirably
stated, and answers admitting no shade of doubt, since they were
not a product of human thought, always liable to error, but were
all the product of official activity.  The answers were all based
on official data furnished by governors and heads of churches,
and founded on the reports of district magistrates and
ecclesiastical superintendents, founded in their turn on the
reports of parochial overseers and parish priests; and so all of
these answers were unhesitating and certain.  All such questions
as, for instance, of the cause of failure of crops, of the
adherence of certain tribes to their ancient beliefs, etc.--
questions which, but for the convenient intervention of the
official machine, are not, and cannot be solved for ages--
received full, unhesitating solution.  And this solution was in
favor of Alexey Alexandrovitch's contention.  But Stremov, who
had felt stung to the quick at the last sitting, had, on the
reception of the commission's report, resorted to tactics which
Alexey Alexandrovitch had not anticipated.  Stremov, carrying
with him several members, went over to Alexey Alexandrovitch's
side, and not contenting himself with warmly defending the
measure proposed by Karenin, proposed other more extreme measures
in the same direction.  These measures, still further exaggerated
in opposition to what was Alexey Alexandrovitch's fundamental
idea, were passed by the commission, and then the aim of
Stremov's tactics became apparent.  Carried to an extreme, the
measures seemed at once to be so absurd that the highest
authorities, and public opinion, and intellectual ladies, and the
newspapers, all at the same time fell foul of them, expressing
their indignation both with the measures and their nominal
father, Alexey Alexandrovitch.  Stremov drew back, affecting to
have blindly followed Karenin, and to be astounded and distressed
at what had been done.  This meant the defeat of Alexey
Alexandrovitch.  But in spite of failing health, in spite of his
domestic griefs, he did not give in.  There was a split in the
commission.  Some members, with Stremov at their head, justified
their mistake on the ground that they had put faith in the
commission of revision, instituted by Alexey Alexandrovitch, and
maintained that the report of the commission was rubbish, and
simply so much waste paper.  Alexey Alexandrovitch, with a
following of those who saw the danger of so revolutionary an
attitude to official documents, persisted in upholding the
statements obtained by the revising commission.  In consequence
of this, in the higher spheres, and even in society, all was
chaos, and although everyone was interested, no one could tell
whether the native tribes really were becoming impoverished and
ruined, or whether they were in a flourishing condition.  The
position of Alexey Alexandrovitch, owing to this, and partly
owing to the contempt lavished on him for his wife's infidelity,
became very precarious.  And in this position he took an
important resolution.  To the astonishment of the commission, he
announced that he should ask permission to go himself to
investigate the question on the spot.  And having obtained
permission, Alexey Alexandrovitch prepared to set off to these
remote provinces.

Alexey Alexandrovitch's departure made a great sensation, the
more so as just before he started he officially returned the
posting-fares allowed him for twelve horses, to drive to his
destination.

"I think it very noble," Betsy said about this to the Princess
Myakaya.  "Why take money for posting-horses when everyone knows
that there are railways everywhere now?"

But Princess Myakaya did not agree, and the Princess Tverskaya's
opinion annoyed her indeed.

"It's all very well for you to talk," said she, "when you have I
don't know how many millions; but I am very glad when my husband
goes on a revising tour in the summer.  It's very good for him
and pleasant traveling about, and it's a settled arrangement for
me to keep a carriage and coachman on the money."

On his way to the remote provinces Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped
for three days at Moscow.

The day after his arrival he was driving back from calling on the
governor-general.  At the crossroads by Gazetoy Place, where
there are always crowds of carriages and sledges, Alexey
Alexandrovitch suddenly heard his name called out in such a loud
and cheerful voice that he could not help looking round.  At the
corner of the pavement, in a short, stylish overcoat and a
low-crowned fashionable hat, jauntily askew, with a smile that
showed a gleam of white teeth and red lips, stood Stepan
Arkadyevitch, radiant, young, and beaming.  He called him
vigorously and urgently, and insisted on his stopping.  He had
one arm on the window of a carriage that was stopping at the
corner, and out of the window were thrust the heads of a lady in
a velvet hat, and two children.  Stepan Arkadyevitch was smiling
and beckoning to his brother-in-law.  The lady smiled a kindly
smile too, and she too waved her hand to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
It was Dolly with her children.

Alexey Alexandrovitch did not want to see anyone in Moscow, and
least of all his wife's brother.  He raised his hat and would
have driven on, but Stepan Arkadyevitch told his coachman to
stop, and ran across the snow to him.

"Well, what a shame not to have let us know!  Been here long?  I
was at Dussot's yesterday and saw 'Karenin' on the visitors'
list, but it never entered my head that it was you," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, sticking his head in at the window of the carriage,
"or I should have looked you up.  I am glad to see you!" he
said, knocking one foot against the other to shake the snow off.
"What a shame of you not to let us know!" he repeated.

"I had no time; I am very busy," Alexey Alexandrovitch responded
dryly.

"Come to my wife, she does so want to see you."

Alexey Alexandrovitch unfolded the rug in which his frozen feet
were wrapped, and getting out of his carriage made his way over
the snow to Darya Alexandrovna.

"Why, Alexey Alexandrovitch, what are you cutting us like this
for?" said Dolly, smiling.

"I was very busy.  Delighted to see you!" he said in a tone
clearly indicating that he was annoyed by it.  "How are you?"

"Tell me, how is my darling Anna?"

Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled something and would have gone on.
But Stepan Arkadyevitch stopped him.

"I tell you what we'll do tomorrow.  Dolly, ask him to dinner.
We'll ask Koznishev and Pestsov, so as to entertain him with our
Moscow celebrities."

"Yes, please, do come," said Dolly; "we will expect you at five,
or six o'clock, if you like.  How is my darling Anna?  How
long..."

"She is quite well," Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled, frowning.
"Delighted!" and he moved away towards his carriage.

"You will come?" Dolly called after him.

Alexey Alexandrovitch said something which Dolly could not catch
in the noise of the moving carriages.

"I shall come round tomorrow!" Stepan Arkadyevitch shouted to
him.

Alexey Alexandrovitch got into his carriage, and buried himself
in it so as neither to see nor be seen.

"Queer fish!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch to his wife, and glancing
at his watch, he made a motion of his hand before his face,
indicating a caress to his wife and children, and walked jauntily
along the pavement.

"Stiva! Stiva!" Dolly called, reddening.

He turned round.

"I must get coats, you know, for Grisha and Tanya.  Give me the
money."

"Never mind; you tell them I'll pay the bill!" and he vanished,
nodding genially to an acquaintance who drove by.



Chapter 7


The next day was Sunday.  Stepan Arkadyevitch went to the Grand
Theater to a rehearsal of the ballet, and gave Masha Tchibisova,
a pretty dancing-girl whom he had just taken under his
protection, the coral necklace he had promised her the evening
before, and behind the scenes in the dim daylight of the theater,
managed to kiss her pretty little face, radiant over her present.
Besides the gift of the necklace he wanted to arrange with her
about meeting after the ballet.  After explaining that he could
not come at the beginning of the ballet, he promised he would
come for the last act and take her to supper.  From the theater
Stepan Arkadyevitch drove to Ohotny Row, selected himself the
fish and asparagus for dinner, and by twelve o'clock was at
Dussot's, where he had to see three people, luckily all staying
at the same hotel: Levin, who had recently come back from abroad
and was staying there; the new head of his department, who had
just been promoted to that position, and had come on a tour of
revision to Moscow; and his brother-in-law, Karenin, whom he must
see, so as to be sure of bringing him to dinner.

Stepan Arkadyevitch liked dining, but still better he liked to
give a dinner, small, but very choice, both as regards the food
and drink and as regards the selection of guests.  He
particularly liked the program of that day's dinner.  There would
be fresh perch, asparagus, and _la pièce de resistance_--
first-rate, but quite plain, roast beef, and wines to suit: so
much for the eating and drinking.  Kitty and Levin would be of
the party, and that this might not be obtrusively evident, there
would be a girl cousin too, and young Shtcherbatsky, and _la pièce
de resistance_ among the guests--Sergey Koznishev and Alexey
Alexandrovitch.  Sergey Ivanovitch was a Moscow man, and a
philosopher; Alexey Alexandrovitch a Petersburger, and a
practical politician.  He was asking, too, the well-known
eccentric enthusiast, Pestsov, a liberal, a great talker, a
musician, an historian, and the most delightfully youthful person
of fifty, who would be a sauce or garnish for Koznishev and
Karenin.  He would provoke them and set them off.

The second installment for the forest had been received from the
merchant and was not yet exhausted; Dolly had been very amiable
and goodhumored of late, and the idea of the dinner pleased
Stepan Arkadyevitch from every point of view.  He was in the most
light-hearted mood.  There were two circumstances a little
unpleasant, but these two circumstances were drowned in the sea
of good-humored gaiety which flooded the soul of Stepan
Arkadyevitch.  These two circumstances were: first, that on
meeting Alexey Alexandrovitch the day before in the street he had
noticed that he was cold and reserved with him, and putting the
expression of Alexey Alexandrovitch's face and the fact that he
had not come to see them or let them know of his arrival with the
rumors he had heard about Anna and Vronsky, Stepan Arkadyevitch
guessed that something was wrong between the husband and wife.

That was one disagreeable thing.  The other slightly disagreeable
fact was that the new head of his department, like all new heads,
had the reputation already of a terrible person, who got up at
six o'clock in the morning, worked like a horse, and insisted on
his subordinates working in the same way.  Moreover, this new
head had the further reputation of being a bear in his manners,
and was, according to all reports, a man of a class in all
respects the opposite of that to which his predecessor had
belonged, and to which Stepan Arkadyevitch had hitherto belonged
himself.  On the previous day Stepan Arkadyevitch had appeared at
the office in a uniform, and the new chief had been very affable
and had talked to him as to an acquaintance.  Consequently Stepan
Arkadyevitch deemed it his duty to call upon him in his
non-official dress.  The thought that the new chief might not
tender him a warm reception was the other unpleasant thing.  But
Stepan Arkadyevitch instinctively felt that everything would _come
round_ all right.  "They're all people, all men, like us poor
sinners; why be nasty and quarrelsome?" he thought as he went
into the hotel.

"Good-day, Vassily," he said, walking into the corridor with his
hat cocked on one side, and addressing a footman he knew; "why,
you've let your whiskers grow!  Levin, number seven, eh?  Take me
up, please.  And find out whether Count Anitchkin" (this was the
new head) "is receiving."

"Yes, sir," Vassily responded, smiling.  "You've not been to see
us for a long while."

"I was here yesterday, but at the other entrance.  Is this
number seven?"

Levin was standing with a peasant from Tver in the middle of the
room, measuring a fresh bearskin, when Stepan Arkadyevitch went
in.

"What! you killed him?" cried Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "Well done!
A she-bear?  How are you, Arhip!"

He shook hands with the peasant and sat down on the edge of a
chair, without taking off his coat and hat.

"Come, take off your coat and stay a little," said Levin, taking
his hat.

"No, I haven't time; I've only looked in for a tiny second,"
answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.  He threw open his coat, but
afterwards did take it off, and sat on for a whole hour, talking
to Levin about hunting and the most intimate subjects.

"Come, tell me, please, what you did abroad?  Where have you
been?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, when the peasant had gone.

"Oh, I stayed in Germany, in Prussia, in France, and in England--
not in the capitals, but in the manufacturing towns, and saw a
great deal that was new to me.  And I'm glad I went."

"Yes, I knew your idea of the solution of the labor question."

"Not a bit: in Russia there can be no labor question.  In Russia
the question is that of the relation of the working people to the
land; though the question exists there too--but there it's a
matter of repairing what's been ruined, while with us..."

Stepan Arkadyevitch listened attentively to Levin.

"Yes, yes!" he said, "it's very possible you're right.  But I'm
glad you're in good spirits, and are hunting bears, and working,
and interested.  Shtcherbatsky told me another story--he met
you--that you were in such a depressed state, talking of nothing
but death...."

"Well, what of it?  I've not given up thinking of death," said
Levin.  "It's true that it's high time I was dead; and that all
this is nonsense.  It's the truth I'm telling you.  I do value
my idea and my work awfully; but in reality only consider this:
all this world of ours is nothing but a speck of mildew, which
has grown up on a tiny planet.  And for us to suppose we can have
something great--ideas, work--it's all dust and ashes."

"But all that's as old as the hills, my boy!"

"It is old; but do you know, when you grasp this fully, then
somehow everything becomes of no consequence.  When you
understand that you will die tomorrow, if not today, and nothing
will be left, then everything is so unimportant!  And I consider
my idea very important, but it turns out really to be as
unimportant too, even if it were carried out, as doing for that
bear.  So one goes on living, amusing oneself with hunting, with
work--anything so as not to think of death!"

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled a subtle affectionate smile as he
listened to Levin.

"Well, of course!  Here you've come round to my point.  Do you
remember you attacked me for seeking enjoyment in life? Don't be
so severe, O moralist!"

"No; all the same, what's fine in life is..." Levin hesitated--
"oh, I don't know.  All I know is that we shall soon be dead."

"Why so soon?"

"And do you know, there's less charm in life, when one thinks of
death, but there's more peace."

"On the contrary, the finish is always the best.  But I must be
going," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up for the tenth time.

"Oh, no, stay a bit!" said Levin, keeping him.  "Now, when shall
we see each other again? I'm going tomorrow."

"I'm a nice person!  Why, that's just what I came for! You simply
must come to dinner with us today.  Your brother's coming, and
Karenin, my brother-in-law."

"You don't mean to say he's here?" said Levin, and he wanted to
inquire about Kitty.  He had heard at the beginning of the winter
that she was at Petersburg with her sister, the wife of the
diplomat, and he did not know whether she had come back or not;
but he changed his mind and did not ask.  "Whether she's coming
or not, I don't care," he said to himself.

"So you'll come?"

"Of course."

"At five o'clock, then, and not evening dress."

And Stepan Arkadyevitch got up and went down below to the new
head of his department.  Instinct had not misled Stepan
Arkadyevitch.  The terrible new head turned out to be an
extremely amenable person, and Stepan Arkadyevitch lunched with
him and stayed on, so that it was four o'clock before he got to
Alexey Alexandrovitch.



Chapter 8


Alexey Alexandrovitch, on coming back from church service, had
spent the whole morning indoors.  He had two pieces of business
before him that morning; first, to receive and send on a
deputation from the native tribes which was on its way to
Petersburg, and now at Moscow; secondly, to write the promised
letter to the lawyer.  The deputation, though it had been
summoned at Alexey Alexandrovitch's instigation, was not without
its discomforting and even dangerous aspect, and he was glad he
had found it in Moscow.  The members of this deputation had not
the slightest conception of their duty and the part they were to
play.  They naïvely believed that it was their business to lay
before the commission their needs and the actual condition of
things, and to ask assistance of the government, and utterly
failed to grasp that some of their statements and requests
supported the contention of the enemy's side, and so spoiled the
whole business.  Alexey Alexandrovitch was busily engaged with
them for a long while, drew up a program for them from which they
were not to depart, and on dismissing them wrote a letter to
Petersburg for the guidance of the deputation.  He had his chief
support in this affair in the Countess Lidia Ivanovna.  She was a
specialist in the matter of deputations, and no one knew better
than she how to manage them, and put them in the way they should
go.  Having completed this task, Alexey Alexandrovitch wrote the
letter to the lawyer.  Without the slightest hesitation he gave
him permission to act as he might judge best.  In the letter he
enclosed three of Vronsky's notes to Anna, which were in the
portfolio he had taken away.

Since Alexey Alexandrovitch had left home with the intention of
not returning to his family again, and since he had been at the
lawyer's and had spoken, though only to one man, of his
intention, since especially he had translated the matter from the
world of real life to the world of ink and paper, he had grown
more and more used to his own intention, and by now distinctly
perceived the feasibility of its execution.

He was sealing the envelope to the lawyer, when he heard the loud
tones of Stepan Arkadyevitch's voice.  Stepan Arkadyevitch was
disputing with Alexey Alexandrovitch's servant, and insisting on
being announced.

"No matter," thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, "so much the better.
I will inform him at once of my position in regard to his
sister, and explain why it is I can't dine with him."

"Come in!" he said aloud, collecting his papers, and putting them
in the blotting-paper.

"There, you see, you're talking nonsense, and he's at home!"
responded Stepan Arkadyevitch's voice, addressing the servant,
who had refused to let him in, and taking off his coat as he
went, Oblonsky walked into the room.  "Well, I'm awfully glad
I've found you!  So I hope..." Stepan Arkadyevitch began
cheerfully.

"I cannot come," Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly, standing and
not asking his visitor to sit down.

Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought to pass at once into those
frigid relations in which he ought to stand with the brother of a
wife against whom he was beginning a suit for divorce.  But he
had not taken into account the ocean of kindliness brimming over
in the heart of Stepan Arkadyevitch.

Stepan Arkadyevitch opened wide his clear, shining eyes.

"Why can't you? What do you mean?" he asked in perplexity,
speaking in French.  "Oh, but it's a promise.  And we're all
counting on you."

"I want to tell you that I can't dine at your house, because the
terms of relationship which have existed between us must cease."

"How?  How do you mean?  What for?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch with
a smile.

"Because I am beginning an action for divorce against your
sister, my wife.  I ought to have..."

But, before Alexey Alexandrovitch had time to finish his
sentence, Stepan Arkadyevitch was behaving not at all as he had
expected.  He groaned and sank into an armchair.

"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch!  What are you saying?" cried
Oblonsky, and his suffering was apparent in his face.

"It is so."

"Excuse me, I can't, I can't believe it!"

Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, feeling that his words had not
had the effect he anticipated, and that it would be unavoidable
for him to explain his position, and that, whatever explanations
he might make, his relations with his brother-in-law would remain
unchanged.

"Yes, I am brought to the painful necessity of seeking a
divorce," he said.

"I will say one thing, Alexey Alexandrovitch.  I know you for an
excellent, upright man; I know Anna--excuse me, I can't change my
opinion of her--for a good, an excellent woman; and so, excuse
me, I cannot believe it.  There is some misunderstanding," said
he.

"Oh, if it were merely a misunderstanding!..."

"Pardon, I understand," interposed Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "But of
course....  One thing: you must not act in haste.  You must not,
you must not act in haste!"

"I am not acting in haste," Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly,
"but one cannot ask advice of anyone in such a matter.  I have
quite made up my mind."

"This is awful!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "I would do one
thing, Alexey Alexandrovitch.  I beseech you, do it!" he said.
"No action has yet been taken, if I understand rightly.  Before
you take advice, see my wife, talk to her.  She loves Anna like a
sister, she loves you, and she's a wonderful woman.  For God's
sake, talk to her!  Do me that favor, I beseech you!"

Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and Stepan Arkadyevitch looked at
him sympathetically, without interrupting his silence.

"You will go to see her?"

"I don't know.  That was just why I have not been to see you.  I
imagine our relations must change."

"Why so?  I don't see that.  Allow me to believe that apart from
our connection you have for me, at least in part, the same
friendly feeling I have always had for you...and sincere esteem,"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pressing his hand.  "Even if your worst
suppositions were correct, I don't--and never would--take on
myself to judge either side, and I see no reason why our
relations should be affected.  But now, do this, come and see my
wife."

"Well, we look at the matter differently," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch coldly.  "However, we won't discuss it."

"No; why shouldn't you come today to dine, anyway?  My wife's
expecting you.  Please, do come.  And, above all, talk it over
with her.  She's a wonderful woman.  For God's sake, on my knees,
I implore you!"

"If you so much wish it, I will come," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, sighing.

And, anxious to change the conversation, he inquired about what
interested them both--the new head of Stepan Arkadyevitch's
department, a man not yet old, who had suddenly been promoted to
so high a position.

Alexey Alexandrovitch had previously felt no liking for Count
Anitchkin, and had always differed from him in his opinions.  But
now, from a feeling readily comprehensible to officials--that
hatred felt by one who has suffered a defeat in the service for
one who has received a promotion, he could not endure him.

"Well, have you seen him?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch with a
malignant smile.

"Of course; he was at our sitting yesterday.  He seems to know
his work capitally, and to be very energetic."

"Yes, but what is his energy directed to?" said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.  "Is he aiming at doing anything, or simply
undoing what's been done? It's the great misfortune of our
government--this paper administration, of which he's a worthy
representative."

"Really, I don't know what fault one could find with him.  His
policy I don't know, but one thing--he's a very nice fellow,"
answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "I've just been seeing him, and
he's really a capital fellow.  We lunched together, and I taught
him how to make, you know that drink, wine and oranges.  It's so
cooling.  And it's a wonder he didn't know it.  He liked it
awfully.  No, really he's a capital fellow."

Stepan Arkadyevitch glanced at his watch.

"Why, good heavens, it's four already, and I've still to go to
Dolgovushin's!  So please come round to dinner.  You can't
imagine how you will grieve my wife and me."

The way in which Alexey Alexandrovitch saw his brother-in-law out
was very different from the manner in which he had met him.

"I've promised, and I'll come," he answered wearily.

"Believe me, I appreciate it, and I hope you won't regret it,"
answered Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.

And, putting on his coat as he went, he patted the footman on the
head, chuckled, and went out.

"At five o'clock, and not evening dress, please," he shouted once
more, turning at the door.



Chapter 9


It was past five, and several guests had already arrived, before
the host himself got home.  He went in together with Sergey
Ivanovitch Koznishev and Pestsov, who had reached the street door
at the same moment.  These were the two leading representatives
of the Moscow intellectuals, as Oblonsky had called them.  Both
were men respected for their character and their intelligence.
They respected each other, but were in complete and hopeless
disagreement upon almost every subject, not because they belonged
to opposite parties, but precisely because they were of the same
party (their enemies refused to see any distinction between their
views); but, in that party, each had his own special shade of
opinion.  And since no difference is less easily overcome than
the difference of opinion about semi-abstract questions, they
never agreed in any opinion, and had long, indeed, been
accustomed to jeer without anger, each at the other's
incorrigible aberrations.

They were just going in at the door, talking of the weather, when
Stepan Arkadyevitch overtook them.  In the drawing room there
were already sitting Prince Alexander Dmitrievitch Shtcherbatsky,
young Shtcherbatsky, Turovtsin, Kitty, and Karenin.

Stepan Arkadyevitch saw immediately that things were not going
well in the drawing-room without him.  Darya Alexandrovna, in her
best gray silk gown, obviously worried about the children, who
were to have their dinner by themselves in the nursery, and by
her husband's absence, was not equal to the task of making the
party mix without him.  All were sitting like so many priests'
wives on a visit (so the old prince expressed it), obviously
wondering why they were there, and pumping up remarks simply to
avoid being silent.  Turovtsin--good, simple man--felt
unmistakably a fish out of water, and the smile with which his
thick lips greeted Stepan Arkadyevitch said, as plainly as words:
"Well, old boy, you have popped me down in a learned set!  A
drinking party now, or the _Château des Fleurs_, would be more in
my line!"  The old prince sat in silence, his bright little eyes
watching Karenin from one side, and Stepan Arkadyevitch saw that
he had already formed a phrase to sum up that politician of whom
guests were invited to partake as though he were a sturgeon.
Kitty was looking at the door, calling up all her energies to
keep her from blushing at the entrance of Konstantin Levin.
Young Shtcherbatsky, who had not been introduced to Karenin, was
trying to look as though he were not in the least conscious of
it. Karenin himself had followed the Petersburg fashion for a
dinner with ladies and was wearing evening dress and a white tie.
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw by his face that he had come simply to
keep his promise, and was performing a disagreeable duty in being
present at this gathering.  He was indeed the person chiefly
responsible for the chill benumbing all the guests before Stepan
Arkadyevitch came in.

On entering the drawing room Stepan Arkadyevitch apologized,
explaining that he had been detained by that prince, who was
always the scapegoat for all his absences and unpunctualities,
and in one moment he had made all the guests acquainted with each
other, and, bringing together Alexey Alexandrovitch and Sergey
Koznishev, started them on a discussion of the Russification of
Poland, into which they immediately plunged with Pestsov.
Slapping Turovtsin on the shoulder, he whispered something comic
in his ear, and set him down by his wife and the old prince.
Then he told Kitty she was looking very pretty that evening, and
presented Shtcherbatsky to Karenin.  In a moment he had so
kneaded together the social dough that the drawing room became
very lively, and there was a merry buzz of voices.  Konstantin
Levin was the only person who had not arrived.  But this was so
much the better, as going into the dining room, Stepan
Arkadyevitch found to his horror that the port and sherry had
been procured from Deprè, and not from Levy, and, directing that
the coachman should be sent off as speedily as possible to
Levy's, he was going back to the drawing room.

In the dining room he was met by Konstantin Levin.

"I'm not late?"

"You can never help being late!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, taking
his arm.

"Have you a lot of people?  Who's here?" asked Levin, unable to
help blushing, as he knocked the snow off his cap with his glove.

"All our own set.  Kitty's here.  Come along, I'll introduce you
to Karenin."

Stepan Arkadyevitch, for all his liberal views, was well aware
that to meet Karenin was sure to be felt a flattering
distinction, and so treated his best friends to this honor.  But
at that instant Konstantin Levin was not in a condition to feel
all the gratification of making such an acquaintance.  He had not
seen Kitty since that memorable evening when he met Vronsky, not
counting, that is, the moment when he had had a glimpse of her on
the highroad.  He had known at the bottom of his heart that he
would see her here today.  But to keep his thoughts free, he had
tried to persuade himself that he did not know it.  Now when he
heard that she was here, he was suddenly conscious of such
delight, and at the same time of such dread, that his breath
failed him and he could not utter what he wanted to say.

"What is she like, what is she like?  Like what she used to be,
or like what she was in the carriage?  What if Darya Alexandrovna
told the truth?  Why shouldn't it be the truth?" he thought.

"Oh, please, introduce me to Karenin," he brought out with an
effort, and with a desperately determined step he walked into the
drawing room and beheld her.

She was not the same as she used to be, nor was she as she had
been in the carriage; she was quite different.

She was scared, shy, shame-faced, and still more charming from
it.  She saw him the very instant he walked into the room.  She
had been expecting him.  She was delighted, and so confused at
her own delight that there was a moment, the moment when he went
up to her sister and glanced again at her, when she, and he, and
Dolly, who saw it all, thought she would break down and would
begin to cry.  She crimsoned, turned white, crimsoned again, and
grew faint, waiting with quivering lips for him to come to her.
He went up to her, bowed, and held out his hand without speaking.
Except for the slight quiver of her lips and the moisture in her
eyes that made them brighter, her smile was almost calm as she
said:

"How long it is since we've seen each other!" and with desperate
determination she pressed his hand with her cold hand.

"You've not seen me, but I've seen you," said Levin, with a
radiant smile of happiness.  "I saw you when you were driving
from the railway station to Ergushovo."

"When?" she asked, wondering.

"You were driving to Ergushovo," said Levin, feeling as if he
would sob with the rapture that was flooding his heart.  "And how
dared I associate a thought of anything not innocent with this
touching creature?  And, yes, I do believe it's true what Darya
Alexandrovna told me," he thought.

Stepan Arkadyevitch took him by the arm and led him away to
Karenin.

"Let me introduce you." He mentioned their names.

"Very glad to meet you again," said Alexey Alexandrovitch coldly,
shaking hands with Levin.

"You are acquainted?" Stepan Arkadyevitch asked in surprise.

"We spent three hours together in the train," said Levin smiling,
"but got out, just as in a masquerade, quite mystified--at least
I was."

"Nonsense! Come along, please," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
pointing in the direction of the dining room.

The men went into the dining-room and went up to a table, laid
with six sorts of spirits and as many kinds of cheese, some with
little silver spades and some without, caviar, herrings,
preserves of various kinds, and plates with slices of French
bread.

The men stood round the strong-smelling spirits and salt
delicacies, and the discussion of the Russification of Poland
between Koznishev, Karenin, and Pestsov died down in anticipation
of dinner.

Sergey Ivanovitch was unequaled in his skill in winding up the
most heated and serious argument by some unexpected pinch of
Attic salt that changed the disposition of his opponent.  He did
this now.

Alexey Alexandrovitch had been maintaining that the Russification
of Poland could only be accomplished as a result of larger
measures which ought to be introduced by the Russian government.

Pestsov insisted that one country can only absorb another when it
is the more densely populated.

Koznishev admitted both points, but with limitations.  As they
were going out of the drawing room to conclude the argument,
Koznishev said, smiling:

"So, then, for the Russification of our foreign populations there
is but one method--to bring up as many children as one can.  My
brother and I are terribly in fault, I see.  You married men,
especially you, Stepan Arkadyevitch, are the real patriots: what
number have you reached?" he said, smiling genially at their host
and holding out a tiny wine glass to him.

Everyone laughed, and Stepan Arkadyevitch with particular good
humor.

"Oh, yes, that's the best method!" he said, munching cheese and
filling the wine-glass with a special sort of spirit.  The
conversation dropped at the jest.

"This cheese is not bad.  Shall I give you some?" said the master
of the house.  "Why, have you been going in for gymnastics
again?" he asked Levin, pinching his muscle with his left hand.
Levin smiled, bent his arm, and under Stepan Arkadyevitch's
fingers the muscles swelled up like a sound cheese, hard as a
knob of iron, through the fine cloth of the coat.

"What biceps! A perfect Samson!"

"I imagine great strength is needed for hunting bears," observed
Alexey Alexandrovitch, who had the mistiest notions about the
chase.  He cut off and spread with cheese a wafer of bread fine
as a spider-web.

Levin smiled.

"Not at all.  Quite the contrary; a child can kill a bear," he
said, with a slight bow moving aside for the ladies, who were
approaching the table.

"You have killed a bear, I've been told!" said Kitty, trying
assiduously to catch with her fork a perverse mushroom that would
slip away, and setting the lace quivering over her white arm.
"Are there bears on your place?" she added, turning her charming
little head to him and smiling.

There was apparently nothing extraordinary in what she said, but
what unutterable meaning there was for him in every sound, in
every turn of her lips, her eyes, her hand as she said it!  There
was entreaty for forgiveness, and trust in him, and tenderness--
soft, timid tenderness--and promise and hope and love for him,
which he could not but believe in and which choked him with
happiness.

"No, we've been hunting in the Tver province.  It was coming back
from there that I met your _beaufrère_ in the train, or your
_beaufrère's_ brother-in-law," he said with a smile.  "It was an
amusing meeting."

And he began telling with droll good-humor how, after not
sleeping all night, he had, wearing an old fur-lined,
full-skirted coat, got into Alexey Alexandrovitch's compartment.

"The conductor, forgetting the proverb, would have chucked me out
on account of my attire; but thereupon I began expressing my
feelings in elevated language, and...you, too," he said,
addressing Karenin and forgetting his name, "at first would have
ejected me on the ground of the old coat, but afterwards you took
my part, for which I am extremely grateful."

"The rights of passengers generally to choose their seats are too
ill-defined," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, rubbing the tips of his
fingers on his handkerchief.

"I saw you were in uncertainty about me," said Levin, smiling
good-naturedly, "but I made haste to plunge into intellectual
conversation to smooth over the defects of my attire."
Sergey Ivanovitch, while he kept up a conversation with their
hostess, had one ear for his brother, and he glanced askance at
him.  "What is the matter with him today?  Why such a conquering
hero?" he thought.  He did not know that Levin was feeling as
though he had grown wings.  Levin knew she was listening to his
words and that she was glad to listen to him.  And this was the
only thing that interested him.  Not in that room only, but in
the whole world, there existed for him only himself, with
enormously increased importance and dignity in his own eyes, and
she.  He felt himself on a pinnacle that made him giddy, and far
away down below were all those nice excellent Karenins,
Oblonskys, and all the world.

Quite without attracting notice, without glancing at them, as
though there were no other places left, Stepan Arkadyevitch put
Levin and Kitty side by side.

"Oh, you may as well sit there," he said to Levin.

The dinner was as choice as the china, in which Stepan
Arkadyevitch was a connoisseur.  The _soupe Marie-Louise_ was a
splendid success; the tiny pies eaten with it melted in the mouth
and were irreproachable.  The two footmen and Matvey, in white
cravats, did their duty with the dishes and wines unobtrusively,
quietly, and swiftly.  On the material side the dinner was a
success; it was no less so on the immaterial.  The conversation,
at times general and at times between individuals, never paused,
and towards the end the company was so lively that the men rose
from the table, without stopping speaking, and even Alexey
Alexandrovitch thawed.



Chapter 10


Pestsov liked thrashing an argument out to the end, and was not
satisfied with Sergey Ivanovitch's words, especially as he felt
the injustice of his view.

"I did not mean," he said over the soup, addressing Alexey
Alexandrovitch, "mere density of population alone, but in
conjunction with fundamental ideas, and not by means of
principles."

"It seems to me," Alexey Alexandrovitch said languidly, and with
no haste, "that that's the same thing.  In my opinion, influence
over another people is only possible to the people which has the
higher development, which..."

"But that's just the question," Pestsov broke in in his bass.

He was always in a hurry to speak, and seemed always to put his
whole soul into what he was saying.  "In what are we to make
higher development consist?  The English, the French, the
Germans, which is at the highest stage of development?  Which of
them will nationalize the other?  We see the Rhine provinces have
been turned French, but the Germans are not at a lower stage!" he
shouted.  "There is another law at work there."

"I fancy that the greater influence is always on the side of true
civilization," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, slightly lifting his
eyebrows.

"But what are we to lay down as the outward signs of true
civilization?" said Pestsov.

"I imagine such signs are generally very well known," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

"But are they fully known?" Sergey Ivanovitch put in with a
subtle smile.  "It is the accepted view now that real culture
must be purely classical; but we see most intense disputes on
each side of the question, and there is no denying that the
opposite camp has strong points in its favor."

"You are for classics, Sergey Ivanovitch.  Will you take red
wine?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"I am not expressing my own opinion of either form of culture,"
Sergey Ivanovitch said, holding out his glass with a smile of
condescension, as to a child.  "I only say that both sides have
strong arguments to support them," he went on, addressing Alexey
Alexandrovitch.  "My sympathies are classical from education, but
in this discussion I am personally unable to arrive at a
conclusion.  I see no distinct grounds for classical studies
being given a preeminence over scientific studies."

"The natural sciences have just as great an educational value,"
put in Pestsov.  "Take astronomy, take botany, or zoology with
its system of general principles."

"I cannot quite agree with that," responded Alexey Alexandrovitch
"It seems to me that one must admit that the very process of
studying the forms of language has a peculiarly favorable
influence on intellectual development.  Moreover, it cannot be
denied that the influence of the classical authors is in the
highest degree moral, while, unfortunately, with the study of the
natural sciences are associated the false and noxious doctrines
which are the curse of our day."

Sergey Ivanovitch would have said something, but Pestsov
interrupted him in his rich bass.  He began warmly contesting the
justice of this view.  Sergey Ivanovitch waited serenely to
speak, obviously with a convincing reply ready.

"But," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling subtly, and addressing
Karenin, "One must allow that to weigh all the advantages and
disadvantages of classical and scientific studies is a difficult
task, and the question which form of education was to be
preferred would not have been so quickly and conclusively decided
if there had not been in favor of classical education, as you
expressed it just now, its moral--disons le mot--anti-nihilist
influence."

"Undoubtedly."

"If it had not been for the distinctive property of
anti-nihilistic influence on the side of classical studies, we
should have considered the subject more, have weighed the
arguments on both sides," said Sergey Ivanovitch with a subtle
smile, "we should have given elbow-room to both tendencies.  But
now we know that these little pills of classical learning possess
the medicinal property of anti-nihilism, and we boldly prescribe
them to our patients....  But what if they had no such medicinal
property?" he wound up humorously.

At Sergey Ivanovitch's little pills, everyone laughed; Turovtsin
in especial roared loudly and jovially, glad at last to have
found something to laugh at, all he ever looked for in listening
to conversation.

Stepan Arkadyevitch had not made a mistake in inviting Pestsov.
With Pestsov intellectual conversation never flagged for an
instant.  Directly Sergey Ivanovitch had concluded the
conversation with his jest, Pestsov promptly started a new one.

"I can't agree even," said he, "that the government had that aim.
The government obviously is guided by abstract considerations,
and remains indifferent to the influence its measures may
exercise.  The education of women, for instance, would naturally
be regarded as likely to be harmful, but the government opens
schools and universities for women."

And the conversation at once passed to the new subject of the
education of women.

Alexey Alexandrovitch expressed the idea that the education of
women is apt to be confounded with the emancipation of women, and
that it is only so that it can be considered dangerous.

"I consider, on the contrary, that the two questions are
inseparably connected together," said Pestsov; "it is a vicious
circle.  Woman is deprived of rights from lack of education, and
the lack of education results from the absence of rights.  We
must not forget that the subjection of women is so complete, and
dates from such ages back that we are often unwilling to
recognize the gulf that separates them from us," said he.

"You said rights," said Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till Pestsov
had finished, "meaning the right of sitting on juries, of voting,
of presiding at official meetings, the right of entering the
civil service, of sitting in parliament..."

"Undoubtedly."

"But if women, as a rare exception, can occupy such positions, it
seems to me you are wrong in using the expression 'rights.'  It
would be more correct to say duties.  Every man will agree that
in doing the duty of a juryman, a witness, a telegraph clerk, we
feel we are performing duties.  And therefore it would be correct
to say that women are seeking duties, and quite legitimately.
And one can but sympathize with this desire to assist in the
general labor of man."

"Quite so," Alexey Alexandrovitch assented.  "The question, I
imagine, is simply whether they are fitted for such duties."

"They will most likely be perfectly fitted," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, "when education has become general among them.  We
see this..."

"How about the proverb?" said the prince, who had a long while
been intent on the conversation, his little comical eyes
twinkling.  "I can say it before my daughter: her hair is long,
because her wit is..."

"Just what they thought of the negroes before their
emancipation!" said Pestsov angrily.

"What seems strange to me is that women should seek fresh
duties," said Sergey Ivanovitch, "while we see, unhappily, that
men usually try to avoid them."

"Duties are bound up with rights--power, money, honor; those are
what women are seeking," said Pestsov.

"Just as though I should seek the right to be a wet-nurse and
feel injured because women are paid for the work, while no one
will take me," said the old prince.

Turovtsin exploded in a loud roar of laughter and Sergey
Ivanovitch regretted that he had not made this comparison.  Even
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled.

"Yes, but a man can't nurse a baby," said Pestsov, "while a
woman..."

"No, there was an Englishman who did suckle his baby on board
ship," said the old prince, feeling this freedom in conversation
permissible before his own daughters.

"There are as many such Englishmen as there would be women
officials," said Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Yes, but what is a girl to do who has no family?" put in Stepan
Arkadyevitch, thinking of Masha Tchibisova, whom he had had in
his mind all along, in sympathizing with Pestsov and supporting
him.

"If the story of such a girl were thoroughly sifted, you would
find she had abandoned a family--her own or a sister's, where she
might have found a woman's duties," Darya Alexandrovna broke in
unexpectedly in a tone of exasperation, probably suspecting what
sort of girl Stepan Arkadyevitch was thinking of.

"But we take our stand on principle as the ideal," replied
Pestsov in his mellow bass.  "Woman desires to have rights, to be
independent, educated.  She is oppressed, humiliated by the
consciousness of her disabilities."

"And I'm oppressed and humiliated that they won't engage me at
the Foundling," the old prince said again, to the huge delight of
Turovtsin, who in his mirth dropped his asparagus with the thick
end in the sauce.



Chapter 11


Everyone took part in the conversation except Kitty and Levin.
At first, when they were talking of the influence that one people
has on another, there rose to Levin's mind what he had to say on
the subject.  But these ideas, once of such importance in his
eyes, seemed to come into his brain as in a dream, and had now
not the slightest interest for him.  It even struck him as
strange that they should be so eager to talk of what was of no
use to anyone.  Kitty, too, should, one would have supposed, have
been interested in what they were saying of the rights and
education of women.  How often she had mused on the subject,
thinking of her friend abroad, Varenka, of her painful state of
dependence, how often she had wondered about herself what would
become of her if she did not marry, and how often she had argued
with her sister about it!  But it did not interest her at all.
She and Levin had a conversation of their own, yet not a
conversation, but some sort of mysterious communication, which
brought them every moment nearer, and stirred in both a sense of
glad terror before the unknown into which they were entering.

At first Levin, in answer to Kitty's question how he could have
seen her last year in the carriage, told her how he had been
coming home from the mowing along the highroad and had met her.

"It was very, very early in the morning.  You were probably only
just awake.  Your mother was asleep in the corner.  It was an
exquisite morning.  I was walking along wondering who it could be
in a four-in-hand?  It was a splendid set of four horses with
bells, and in a second you flashed by, and I saw you at the
window--you were sitting like this, holding the strings of your
cap in both hands, and thinking awfully deeply about something,"
he said, smiling.  "How I should like to know what you were
thinking about then!  Something important?"

"Wasn't I dreadfully untidy?" she wondered, but seeing the smile
of ecstasy these reminiscences called up, she felt that the
impression she had made had been very good.  She blushed and
laughed with delight; "Really I don't remember."

"How nicely Turovtsin laughs!" said Levin, admiring his moist
eyes and shaking chest.

"Have you known him long?" asked Kitty.

"Oh, everyone knows him!"

"And I see you think he's a horrid man?"

"Not horrid, but nothing in him."

"Oh, you're wrong!  And you must give up thinking so directly!"
said Kitty.  "I used to have a very poor opinion of him too, but
he, he's an awfully nice and wonderfully good-hearted man.  He
has a heart of gold."

"How could you find out what sort of heart he has?"

"We are great friends.  I know him very well.  Last winter, soon
after...you came to see us," she said, with a guilty and at
the same time confiding smile, "all Dolly's children had scarlet
fever, and he happened to come and see her.  And only fancy," she
said in a whisper, "he felt so sorry for her that he stayed and
began to help her look after the children.  Yes, and for three
weeks he stopped with them, and looked after the children like a
nurse."

"I am telling Konstantin Dmitrievitch about Turovtsin in the
scarlet fever," she said, bending over to her sister.

"Yes, it was wonderful, noble!" said Dolly, glancing towards
Turovtsin, who had become aware they were talking of him, and
smiling gently to him.  Levin glanced once more at Turovtsin, and
wondered how it was he had not realized all this man's goodness
before.

"I'm sorry, I'm sorry, and I'll never think ill of people again!"
he said gaily, genuinely expressing what he felt at the moment.



Chapter 12


Connected with the conversation that had sprung up on the rights
of women there were certain questions as to the inequality of
rights in marriage improper to discuss before the ladies.
Pestsov had several times during dinner touched upon these
questions, but Sergey Ivanovitch and Stepan Arkadyevitch
carefully drew him off them.

When they rose from the table and the ladies had gone out,
Pestsov did not follow them, but addressing Alexey
Alexandrovitch, began to expound the chief ground of inequality.
The inequality in marriage, in his opinion, lay in the fact that
the infidelity of the wife and the infidelity of the husband
are punished unequally, both by the law and by public opinion.
Stepan Arkadyevitch went hurriedly up to Alexey Alexandrovitch
and offered him a cigar.

"No, I don't smoke," Alexey Alexandrovitch answered calmly, and
as though purposely wishing to show that he was not afraid of the
subject, he turned to Pestsov with a chilly smile.

"I imagine that such a view has a foundation in the very nature
of things," he said, and would have gone on to the drawing room.
But at this point Turovtsin broke suddenly and unexpectedly into
the conversation, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"You heard, perhaps, about Pryatchnikov?" said Turovtsin, warmed
up by the champagne he had drunk, and long waiting for an
opportunity to break the silence that had weighed on him.  "Vasya
Pryatchnikov," he said, with a good-natured smile on his damp,
red lips, addressing himself principally to the most important
guest, Alexey Alexandrovitch, "they told me today he fought a
duel with Kvitsky at Tver, and has killed him."

Just as it always seems that one bruises oneself on a sore place,
so Stepan Arkadyevitch felt now that the conversation would by
ill luck fall every moment on Alexey Alexandrovitch's sore spot.
He would again have got his brother-in-law away, but Alexey
Alexandrovitch himself inquired, with curiosity:

"What did Pryatchnikov fight about?"

"His wife.  Acted like a man, he did!  Called him out and shot
him!"

"Ah!" said Alexey Alexandrovitch indifferently, and lifting his
eyebrows, he went into the drawing room.

"How glad I am you have come," Dolly said with a frightened
smile, meeting him in the outer drawing room.  "I must talk to
you.  Let's sit here."

Alexey Alexandrovitch, with the same expression of indifference,
given him by his lifted eyebrows, sat down beside Darya
Alexandrovna, and smiled affectedly.

"It's fortunate," said he, "especially as I was meaning to ask
you to excuse me, and to be taking leave.  I have to start
tomorrow."

Darya Alexandrovna was firmly convinced of Anna's innocence, and
she felt herself growing pale and her lips quivering with anger
at this frigid, unfeeling man, who was so calmly intending to
ruin her innocent friend.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch," she said, with desperate resolution
looking him in the face, "I asked you about Anna, you made me no
answer.  How is she?"

"She is, I believe, quite well, Darya Alexandrovna," replied
Alexey Alexandrovitch, not looking at her.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, forgive me, I have no right...but I
love Anna as a sister, and esteem her; I beg, I beseech you to
tell me what is wrong between you? what fault do you find with
her?"

Alexey Alexandrovitch frowned, and almost closing his eyes,
dropped his head.

"I presume that your husband has told you the grounds on which I
consider it necessary to change my attitude to Anna Arkadyevna?"
he said, not looking her in the face, but eyeing with displeasure
Shtcherbatsky, who was walking across the drawing room.

"I don't believe it, I don't believe it, I can't believe it!"
Dolly said, clasping her bony hands before her with a vigorous
gesture.  She rose quickly, and laid her hand on Alexey
Alexandrovitch's sleeve.  "We shall be disturbed here.  Come this
way, please."

Dolly's agitation had an effect on Alexey Alexandrovitch.  He got
up and submissively followed her to the schoolroom.  They sat
down to a table covered with an oilcloth cut in slits by
penknives.

"I don't, I don't believe it!" Dolly said, trying to catch his
glance that avoided her.

"One cannot disbelieve facts, Darya Alexandrovna," said he, with
an emphasis on the word "facts."

"But what has she done?" said Darya Alexandrovna.  "What
precisely has she done?"

"She has forsaken her duty, and deceived her husband.  That's
what she has done," said he.

"No, no, it can't be!  No, for God's sake, you are mistaken,"
said Dolly, putting her hands to her temples and closing her
eyes.

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled coldly, with his lips alone, meaning
to signify to her and to himself the firmness of his conviction;
but this warm defense, though it could not shake him, reopened
his wound.  He began to speak with greater heat.

"It is extremely difficult to be mistaken when a wife herself
informs her husband of the fact--informs him that eight years of
her life, and a son, all that's a mistake, and that she wants to
begin life again," he said angrily, with a snort.

"Anna and sin--I cannot connect them, I cannot believe it!"

"Darya Alexandrovna," he said, now looking straight into Dolly's
kindly, troubled face, and feeling that his tongue was being
loosened in spite of himself, "I would give a great deal for
doubt to be still possible.  When I doubted, I was miserable, but
it was better than now.  When I doubted, I had hope; but now
there is no hope, and still I doubt of everything.  I am in such
doubt of everything that I even hate my son, and sometimes do not
believe he is my son.  I am very unhappy."

He had no need to say that.  Darya Alexandrovna had seen that as
soon as he glanced into her face; and she felt sorry for him, and
her faith in the innocence of her friend began to totter.

"Oh, this is awful, awful!  But can it be true that you are
resolved on a divorce?"

"I am resolved on extreme measures.  There is nothing else for me
to do."

"Nothing else to do, nothing else to do..." she replied, with
tears in her eyes.  "Oh no, don't say nothing else to do!" she
said.

"What is horrible in a trouble of this kind is that one cannot,
as in any other--in loss, in death--bear one's trouble in peace,
but that one must act," said he, as though guessing her thought.
"One must get out of the humiliating position in which one is
placed; one can't live _à trois_."

"I understand, I quite understand that," said Dolly, and her head
sank.  She was silent for a little, thinking of herself, of her
own grief in her family, and all at once, with an impulsive
movement, she raised her head and clasped her hands with an
imploring gesture.  "But wait a little!  You are a Christian.
Think of her!  What will become of her, if you cast her off?"

"I have thought, Darya Alexandrovna, I have thought a great
deal," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.  His face turned red in
patches, and his dim eyes looked straight before him.  Darya
Alexandrovna at that moment pitied him with all her heart.  "That
was what I did indeed when she herself made known to me my
humiliation; I left everything as of old.  I gave her a chance to
reform, I tried to save her.  And with what result?  She would
not regard the slightest request--that she should observe
decorum," he said, getting heated.  "One may save anyone who does
not want to be ruined; but if the whole nature is so corrupt, so
depraved, that ruin itself seems to be her salvation, what's to
be done?"

"Anything, only not divorce!" answered Darya Alexandrovna

"But what is anything?"

"No, it is awful!  She will be no one's wife, she will be lost!"

"What can I do?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, raising his
shoulders and his eyebrows.  The recollection of his wife's last
act had so incensed him that he had become frigid, as at the
beginning of the conversation.  "I am very grateful for your
sympathy, but I must be going," he said, getting up.

"No, wait a minute.  You must not ruin her.  Wait a little; I
will tell you about myself.  I was married, and my husband
deceived me; in anger and jealousy, I would have thrown up
everything, I would myself....  But I came to myself again; and
who did it?  Anna saved me.  And here I am living on.  The
children are growing up, my husband has come back to his family,
and feels his fault, is growing purer, better, and I live on....
I have forgiven it, and you ought to forgive!"

Alexey Alexandrovitch heard her, but her words had no effect on
him now.  All the hatred of that day when he had resolved on a
divorce had sprung up again in his soul.  He shook himself, and
said in a shrill, loud voice:--

"Forgive I cannot, and do not wish to, and I regard it as wrong.
I have done everything for this woman, and she has trodden it all
in the mud to which she is akin.  I am not a spiteful man, I have
never hated anyone, but I hate her with my whole soul, and I
cannot even forgive her, because I hate her too much for all the
wrong she has done me!" he said, with tones of hatred in his
voice.

"Love those that hate you...."  Darya Alexandrovna whispered
timorously.

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled contemptuously.  That he knew long
ago, but it could not be applied to his case.

"Love those that hate you, but to love those one hates is
impossible.  Forgive me for having troubled you.  Everyone has
enough to bear in his own grief!"  And regaining his
self-possession, Alexey Alexandrovitch quietly took leave and
went away.



Chapter 13


When they rose from table, Levin would have liked to follow Kitty
into the drawing room; but he was afraid she might dislike this,
as too obviously paying her attention.  He remained in the little
ring of men, taking part in the general conversation, and without
looking at Kitty, he was aware of her movements, her looks, and
the place where she was in the drawing room.

He did at once, and without the smallest effort, keep the promise
he had made her--always to think well of all men, and to like
everyone always.  The conversation fell on the village commune,
in which Pestsov saw a sort of special principle, called by him
the choral principle.  Levin did not agree with Pestsov, nor with
his brother, who had a special attitude of his own, both
admitting and not admitting the significance of the Russian
commune.  But he talked to them, simply trying to reconcile and
soften their differences.  He was not in the least interested in
what he said himself, and even less so in what they said; all he
wanted was that they and everyone should be happy and contented.
He knew now the one thing of importance; and that one thing was
at first there, in the drawing room, and then began moving across
and came to a standstill at the door.  Without turning round he
felt the eyes fixed on him, and the smile, and he could not help
turning round.  She was standing in the doorway with
Shtcherbatsky, looking at him.

"I thought you were going towards the piano," said he, going up
to her.  "That's something I miss in the country--music."

"No; we only came to fetch you and thank you," she said,
rewarding him with a smile that was like a gift, "for coming.
What do they want to argue for?  No one ever convinces anyone,
you know."

"Yes; that's true," said Levin; "it generally happens that one
argues warmly simply because one can't make out what one's
opponent wants to prove."

Levin had often noticed in discussions between the most
intelligent people that after enormous efforts, and an enormous
expenditure of logical subtleties and words, the disputants
finally arrived at being aware that what they had so long been
struggling to prove to one another had long ago, from the
beginning of the argument, been known to both, but that they
liked different things, and would not define what they liked for
fear of its being attacked.  He had often had the experience of
suddenly in a discussion grasping what it was his opponent liked
and at once liking it too, and immediately he found himself
agreeing, and then all arguments fell away as useless.
Sometimes, too, he had experienced the opposite, expressing at
last what he liked himself, which he was devising arguments to
defend, and, chancing to express it well and genuinely, he had
found his opponent at once agreeing and ceasing to dispute his
position.  He tried to say this.

She knitted her brow, trying to understand.  But directly he
began to illustrate his meaning, she understood at once.

"I know: one must find out what he is arguing for, what is
precious to him, then one can..."

She had completely guessed and expressed his badly expressed
idea.  Levin smiled joyfully; he was struck by this transition
from the confused, verbose discussion with Pestsov and his
brother to this laconic, clear, almost wordless communication of
the most complex ideas.

Shtcherbatsky moved away from them, and Kitty, going up to a
card table, sat down, and, taking up the chalk, began drawing
diverging circles over the new green cloth.

They began again on the subject that had been started at dinner--
the liberty and occupations of women.  Levin was of the opinion
of Darya Alexandrovna that a girl who did not marry should find a
woman's duties in a family.  He supported this view by the fact
that no family can get on without women to help; that in every
family, poor or rich, there are and must be nurses, either
relations or hired.

"No," said Kitty, blushing, but looking at him all the more
boldly with her truthful eyes; "a girl may be so circumstanced
that she cannot live in the family without humiliation, while she
herself..."

At the hint he understood her.

"Oh, yes," he said.  "Yes, yes, yes--you're right; you're right!"

And he saw all that Pestsov had been maintaining at dinner of the
liberty of woman, simply from getting a glimpse of the terror of
an old maid's existence and its humiliation in Kitty's heart; and
loving her, he felt that terror and humiliation, and at once gave
up his arguments.

A silence followed.  She was still drawing with the chalk on the
table.  Her eyes were shining with a soft light.  Under the
influence of her mood he felt in all his being a continually
growing tension of happiness.

"Ah! I've scribbled all over the table!" she said, and, laying
down the chalk, she made a movement as though to get up.

"What! shall I be left alone--without her?" he thought with
horror, and he took the chalk.  "Wait a minute," he said, sitting
down to the table.  "I've long wanted to ask you one thing."

He looked straight into her caressing, though frightened eyes.

"Please, ask it."

"Here," he said; and he wrote the initial letters, _w, y, t, m, i,
c, n, b, d, t, m, n, o, t_.  These letters meant, "When you told
me it could never be, did that mean never, or then?"  There
seemed no likelihood that she could make out this complicated
sentence; but he looked at her as though his life depended on her
understanding the words.  She glanced at him seriously, then
leaned her puckered brow on her hands and began to read.  Once or
twice she stole a look at him, as though asking him, "Is it what
I think?"

"I understand," she said, flushing a little.

"What is this word?" he said, pointing to the n that stood for
_never_.

"It means _never_," she said; "but that's not true!"

He quickly rubbed out what he had written, gave her the chalk,
and stood up.  She wrote, _t, i, c, n, a, d_.

Dolly was completely comforted in the depression caused by her
conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch when she caught sight of
the two figures: Kitty with the chalk in her hand, with a shy and
happy smile looking upwards at Levin, and his handsome figure
bending over the table with glowing eyes fastened one minute on
the table and the next on her.  He was suddenly radiant: he had
understood.  It meant, "Then I could not answer differently."

He glanced at her questioningly, timidly.

"Only then?"

"Yes," her smile answered.

"And n...and now?" he asked.

"Well, read this.  I'll tell you what I should like--should like
so much!" she wrote the initial letters, i, y, c, f, a, f, w, h.
This meant, "If you could forget and forgive what happened."

He snatched the chalk with nervous, trembling fingers, and
breaking it, wrote the initial letters of the following phrase,
"I have nothing to forget and to forgive; I have never ceased to
love you."

She glanced at him with a smile that did not waver.

"I understand," she said in a whisper.

He sat down and wrote a long phrase.  She understood it all, and
without asking him, "Is it this?" took the chalk and at once
answered.

For a long while he could not understand what she had written,
and often looked into her eyes.  He was stupefied with happiness.
He could not supply the word she had meant; but in her charming
eyes, beaming with happiness, he saw all he needed to know.  And
he wrote three letters.  But he had hardly finished writing when
she read them over her arm, and herself finished and wrote the
answer, "Yes."

"You're playing _secrétaire_?" said the old prince.  "But we must
really be getting along if you want to be in time at the
theater."

Levin got up and escorted Kitty to the door.

In their conversation everything had been said; it had been said
that she loved him, and that she would tell her father and mother
that he would come tomorrow morning.



Chapter 14


When Kitty had gone and Levin was left alone, he felt such
uneasiness without her, and such an impatient longing to get as
quickly, as quickly as possible, to tomorrow morning, when he
would see her again and be plighted to her forever, that he felt
afraid, as though of death, of those fourteen hours that he had
to get through without her.  It was essential for him to be with
someone to talk to, so as not to be left alone, to kill time.
Stepan Arkadyevitch would have been the companion most congenial
to him, but he was going out, he said, to a _soirèe_, in reality to
the ballet.  Levin only had time to tell him he was happy, and
that he loved him, and would never, never forget what he had done
for him.  The eyes and the smile of Stepan Arkadyevitch showed
Levin that he comprehended that feeling fittingly.

"Oh, so it's not time to die yet?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
pressing Levin's hand with emotion.

"N-n-no!" said Levin.

Darya Alexandrovna too, as she said good-bye to him, gave him a
sort of congratulation, saying, "How glad I am you have met
Kitty again!  One must value old friends."  Levin did not like
these words of Darya Alexandrovna's.  She could not understand
how lofty and beyond her it all was, and she ought not to have
dared to allude to it.  Levin said good-bye to them, but, not to
be left alone, he attached himself to his brother.

"Where are you going?"

"I'm going to a meeting."

"Well, I'll come with you.  May I?"

"What for?  Yes, come along," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling.
"What is the matter with you today?"

"With me?  Happiness is the matter with me!" said Levin, letting
down the window of the carriage they were driving in.  "You don't
mind?--it's so stifling.  It's happiness is the matter with me!
Why is it you have never married?"

Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.

"I am very glad, she seems a nice gi..." Sergey Ivanovitch was
beginning.

"Don't say it! don't say it!" shouted Levin, clutching at the
collar of his fur coat with both hands, and muffling him up in
it.  "She's a nice girl" were such simple, humble words, so out
of harmony with his feeling.

Sergey Ivanovitch laughed outright a merry laugh, which was rare
with him.  "Well, anyway, I may say that I'm very glad of it."

"That you may do tomorrow, tomorrow and nothing more!  Nothing,
nothing, silence," said Levin, and muffling him once more in his
fur coat, he added: "I do like you so!  Well, is it possible for
me to be present at the meeting?"

"Of course it is."

"What is your discussion about today?" asked Levin, never ceasing
smiling.

They arrived at the meeting.  Levin heard the secretary
hesitatingly read the minutes which he obviously did not himself
understand; but Levin saw from this secretary's face what a good,
nice, kind-hearted person he was.  This was evident from his
confusion and embarrassment in reading the minutes.  Then the
discussion began.  They were disputing about the misappropriation
of certain sums and the laying of certain pipes, and Sergey
Ivanovitch was very cutting to two members, and said something at
great length with an air of triumph; and another member,
scribbling something on a bit of paper, began timidly at first,
but afterwards answered him very viciously and delightfully.  And
then Sviazhsky (he was there too) said something too, very
handsomely and nobly.  Levin listened to them, and saw clearly
that these missing sums and these pipes were not anything real,
and that they were not at all angry, but were all the nicest,
kindest people, and everything was as happy and charming as
possible among them.  They did no harm to anyone, and were all
enjoying it.  What struck Levin was that he could see through
them all today, and from little, almost imperceptible signs knew
the soul of each, and saw distinctly that they were all good at
heart.  And Levin himself in particular they were all extremely
fond of that day.  That was evident from the way they spoke to
him, from the friendly, affectionate way even those he did not
know looked at him.

"Well, did you like it?" Sergey Ivanovitch asked him.

"Very much.  I never supposed it was so interesting!  Capital!
Splendid!"

Sviazhsky went up to Levin and invited him to come round to tea
with him.  Levin was utterly at a loss to comprehend or recall
what it was he had disliked in Sviazhsky, what he had failed to
find in him.  He was a clever and wonderfully good-hearted man.

"Most delighted," he said, and asked after his wife and
sister-in-law.  And from a queer association of ideas, because in
his imagination the idea of Sviazhsky's sister-in-law was
connected with marriage, it occurred to him that there was no one
to whom he could more suitably speak of his happiness, and he was
very glad to go and see them.

Sviazhsky questioned him about his improvements on his estate,
presupposing, as he always did, that there was no possibility of
doing anything not done already in Europe, and now this did not
in the least annoy Levin.  On the contrary, he felt that
Sviazhsky was right, that the whole business was of little value,
and he saw the wonderful softness and consideration with which
Sviazhsky avoided fully expressing his correct view.  The ladies
of the Sviazhsky household were particularly delightful.  It
seemed to Levin that they knew all about it already and
sympathized with him, saying nothing merely from delicacy.  He
stayed with them one hour, two, three, talking of all sorts of
subjects but the one thing that filled his heart, and did not
observe that he was boring them dreadfully, and that it was long
past their bedtime.

Sviazhsky went with him into the hall, yawning and wondering at
the strange humor his friend was in.  It was past one o'clock.
Levin went back to his hotel, and was dismayed at the thought
that all alone now with his impatience he had ten hours still
left to get through.  The servant, whose turn it was to be up all
night, lighted his candles, and would have gone away, but Levin
stopped him.  This servant, Yegor, whom Levin had noticed before,
struck him as a very intelligent, excellent, and, above all,
good-hearted man.

"Well, Yegor, it's hard work not sleeping, isn't it?"

"One's got to put up with it!  It's part of our work, you see.
In a gentleman's house it's easier; but then here one makes
more."

It appeared that Yegor had a family, three boys and a daughter, a
sempstress, whom he wanted to marry to a cashier in a saddler's
shop.

Levin, on hearing this, informed Yegor that, in his opinion, in
marriage the great thing was love, and that with love one would
always be happy, for happiness rests only on oneself.  Yegor
listened attentively, and obviously quite took in Levin's idea,
but by way of assent to it he enunciated, greatly to Levin's
surprise, the observation that when he had lived with good
masters he had always been satisfied with his masters, and now
was perfectly satisfied with his employer, though he was a
Frenchman.

"Wonderfully good-hearted fellow!" thought Levin.

"Well, but you yourself, Yegor, when you got married, did you
love your wife?"

"Ay! and why not?" responded Yegor.

And Levin saw that Yegor too was in an excited state and
intending to express all his most heartfelt emotions.

"My life, too, has been a wonderful one.  From a child up..." he
was beginning with flashing eyes, apparently catching Levin's
enthusiasm, just as people catch yawning.

But at that moment a ring was heard.  Yegor departed, and Levin
was left alone.  He had eaten scarcely anything at dinner, had
refused tea and supper at Sviazhsky's, but he was incapable of
thinking of supper.  He had not slept the previous night, but was
incapable of thinking of sleep either.  His room was cold, but he
was oppressed by heat.  He opened both the movable panes in his
window and sat down to the table opposite the open panes.  Over
the snow-covered roofs could be seen a decorated cross with
chains, and above it the rising triangle of Charles's Wain with
the yellowish light of Capella.  He gazed at the cross, then at
the stars, drank in the fresh freezing air that flowed evenly
into the room, and followed as though in a dream the images and
memories that rose in his imagination.  At four o'clock he heard
steps in the passage and peeped out at the door.  It was the
gambler Myaskin, whom he knew, coming from the club.  He walked
gloomily, frowning and coughing.  "Poor, unlucky fellow!" thought
Levin, and tears came into his eyes from love and pity for this
man.  He would have talked with him, and tried to comfort him,
but remembering that he had nothing but his shirt on, he changed
his mind and sat down again at the open pane to bathe in the cold
air and gaze at the exquisite lines of the cross, silent, but
full of meaning for him, and the mounting lurid yellow star.  At
seven o'clock there was a noise of people polishing the floors,
and bells ringing in some servants' department, and Levin felt
that he was beginning to get frozen.  He closed the pane, washed,
dressed, and went out into the street.




Chapter 15


The streets were still empty.  Levin went to the house of the
Shtcherbatskys.  The visitors' doors were closed and everything
was asleep.  He walked back, went into his room again, and asked
for coffee.  The day servant, not Yegor this time, brought it to
him.  Levin would have entered into conversation with him, but a
bell rang for the servant, and he went out.  Levin tried to drink
coffee and put some roll in his mouth, but his mouth was quite at
a loss what to do with the roll.  Levin, rejecting the roll, put
on his coat and went out again for a walk.  It was nine o'clock
when he reached the Shtcherbatskys' steps the second time.  In
the house they were only just up, and the cook came out to go
marketing.  He had to get through at least two hours more.

All that night and morning Levin lived perfectly unconsciously,
and felt perfectly lifted out of the conditions of material life.
He had eaten nothing for a whole day, he had not slept for two
nights, had spent several hours undressed in the frozen air, and
felt not simply fresher and stronger than ever, but felt utterly
independent of his body; he moved without muscular effort, and
felt as if he could do anything.  He was convinced he could fly
upwards or lift the corner of the house, if need be.  He spent
the remainder of the time in the street, incessantly looking at
his watch and gazing about him.

And what he saw then, he never saw again after.  The children
especially going to school, the bluish doves flying down from
the roofs to the pavement, and the little loaves covered with
flour, thrust out by an unseen hand, touched him.  Those loaves,
those doves, and those two boys were not earthly creatures.  It
all happened at the same time: a boy ran towards a dove and
glanced smiling at Levin; the dove, with a whir of her wings,
darted away, flashing in the sun, amid grains of snow that
quivered in the air, while from a little window there came a
smell of fresh-baked bread, and the loaves were put out.  All of
this together was so extraordinarily nice that Levin laughed and
cried with delight.  Going a long way round by Gazetny Place and
Kislovka, he went back again to the hotel, and putting his watch
before him, he sat down to wait for twelve o'clock.  In the next
room they were talking about some sort of machines, and
swindling, and coughing their morning coughs.  They did not
realize that the hand was near twelve.  The hand reached it.
Levin went out onto the steps.  The sledge-drivers clearly knew
all about it.  They crowded round Levin with happy faces,
quarreling among themselves, and offering their services.  Trying
not to offend the other sledge drivers, and promising to drive
with them too, Levin took one and told him to drive to the
Shtcherbatskys'.  The sledge-driver was splendid in a white
shirt-collar sticking out over his overcoat and into his strong,
full-blooded red neck.  The sledge was high and comfortable, and
altogether such a one as Levin never drove in after, and the
horse was a good one, and tried to gallop but didn't seem to
move.  The driver knew the Shtcherbatskys' house, and drew up at
the entrance with a curve of his arm and a "Wo!" especially
indicative of respect for his fare.  The Shtcherbatskys'
hall-porter certainly knew all about it.  This was evident from
the smile in his eyes and the way he said:

"Well, it's a long while since you've been to see us, Konstantin
Demitrievitch!"

Not only he knew all about it, but he was unmistakably delighted
and making efforts to conceal his joy.  Looking into his kindly
old eyes, Levin realized even something new in his happiness.

"Are they up?"

"Pray walk in!  Leave it here," said he, smiling, as Levin would
have come back to take his hat.  That meant something.

"To whom shall I announce your honor?" asked the footman.

The footman, though a young man, and one of the new school of
footmen, a dandy, was a very kind-hearted, good fellow, and he
too knew all about it.

"The princess...the prince...the young princess..." said Levin.

The first person he saw was Mademoiselle Linon.  She walked
across the room, and her ringlets and her face were beaming.  He
had only just spoken to her, when suddenly he heard the rustle of
a skirt at the door, and Mademoiselle Linon vanished from Levin's
eyes, and a joyful terror came over him at the nearness of his
happiness.  Mademoiselle Linon was in great haste, and leaving
him, went out at the other door.  Directly she had gone out,
swift, swift light steps sounded on the parquet, and his bliss,
his life, himself--what was best in himself, what he had so long
sought and longed for--was quickly, so quickly approaching him.
She did not walk, but seemed, by some unseen force, to float to
him.  He saw nothing but her clear, truthful eyes, frightened by
the same bliss of love that flooded his heart.  Those eyes were
shining nearer and nearer, blinding him with their light of love.
She stopped still close to him, touching him.  Her hands rose and
dropped onto his shoulders.

She had done all she could--she had run up to him and given
herself up entirely, shy and happy.  He put his arms round her
and pressed his lips to her mouth that sought his kiss.

She too had not slept all night, and had been expecting him all
the morning.

Her mother and father had consented without demur, and were happy
in her happiness.  She had been waiting for him.  She wanted to
be the first to tell him her happiness and his.  She had got
ready to see him alone, and had been delighted at the idea, and
had been shy and ashamed, and did not know herself what she was
doing.  She had heard his steps and voice, and had waited at the
door for Mademoiselle Linon to go.  Mademoiselle Linon had gone
away.  Without thinking, without asking herself how and what, she
had gone up to him, and did as she was doing.

"Let us go to mamma!" she said, taking him by the hand.  For a
long while he could say nothing, not so much because he was
afraid of desecrating the loftiness of his emotion by a word, as
that every time he tried to say something, instead of words he
felt that tears of happiness were welling up.  He took her hand
and kissed it.

"Can it be true?" he said at last in a choked voice.  "I can't
believe you love me, dear!"

She smiled at that "dear," and at the timidity with which he
glanced at her.

"Yes!" she said significantly, deliberately.  "I am so happy!"

Not letting go his hands, she went into the drawing room.  The
princess, seeing them, breathed quickly, and immediately began to
cry and then immediately began to laugh, and with a vigorous step
Levin had not expected, ran up to him, and hugging his head,
kissed him, wetting his cheeks with her tears.

"So it is all settled!  I am glad.  Love her.  I am glad....
Kitty!"

"You've not been long settling things," said the old prince,
trying to seem unmoved; but Levin noticed that his eyes were wet
when he turned to him.

"I've long, always wished for this!" said the prince, taking
Levin by the arm and drawing him towards himself.  "Even when
this little feather-head fancied..."

"Papa!" shrieked Kitty, and shut his mouth with her hands.

"Well, I won't!" he said.  "I'm very, very ...plea ...Oh,
what a fool I am..."

He embraced Kitty, kissed her face, her hand, her face again, and
made the sign of the cross over her.

And there came over Levin a new feeling of love for this man,
till then so little known to him, when he saw how slowly and
tenderly Kitty kissed his muscular hand.



Chapter 16


The princess sat in her armchair, silent and smiling; the prince
sat  down beside her.  Kitty stood by her father's chair, still
holding his hand.  All were silent.

The princess was the first to put everything into words, and to
translate all thoughts and feelings into practical questions.
And all equally felt this strange and painful for the first
minute.

"When is it to be?  We must have the benediction and
announcement.  And when's the wedding to be?  What do you think,
Alexander?"

"Here he is," said the old prince, pointing to Levin--"he's the
principal person in the matter."

"When?" said Levin blushing.  "Tomorrow; If you ask me, I should
say, the benediction today and the wedding tomorrow."

"Come, _mon cher_, that's nonsense!"

"Well, in a week."

"He's quite mad."

"No, why so?"

"Well, upon my word!" said the mother, smiling, delighted at this
haste.  "How about the trousseau?"

"Will there really be a trousseau and all that?" Levin thought
with horror.  "But can the trousseau and the benediction and all
that--can it spoil my happiness?  Nothing can spoil it!"  He
glanced at Kitty, and noticed that she was not in the least, not
in the very least, disturbed by the idea of the trousseau.  "Then
it must be all right," he thought.

"Oh, I know nothing about it; I only said what I should like,"
he said apologetically.

"We'll talk it over, then.  The benediction and announcement can
take place now.  That's very well."

The princess went up to her husband, kissed him, and would have
gone away, but he kept her, embraced her, and, tenderly as a young
lover, kissed her several times, smiling.  The old people were
obviously muddled for a moment, and did not quite know whether it
was they who were in love again or their daughter.  When the
prince and the princess had gone, Levin went up to his betrothed
and took her hand.  He was self-possessed now and could speak,
and he had a great deal he wanted to tell her.  But he said not
at all what he had to say.

"How I knew it would be so!  I never hoped for it; and yet in my
heart I was always sure," he said.  "I believe that it was
ordained."

"And I!" she said.  "Even when...."  She stopped and went on
again, looking at him resolutely with her truthful eyes, "Even
when I thrust from me my happiness.  I always loved you alone,
but I was carried away.  I ought to tell you....  Can you forgive
that?"

"Perhaps it was for the best.  You will have to forgive me so
much.  I ought to tell you..."

This was one of the things he had meant to speak about.  He had
resolved from the first to tell her two things--that he was not
chaste as she was, and that he was not a believer.  It was
agonizing, but he considered he ought to tell her both these
facts.

"No, not now, later!" he said.

"Very well, later, but you must certainly tell me.  I'm not
afraid of anything.  I want to know everything.  Now it is
settled."

He added: "Settled that you'll take me whatever I may be--you
won't give me up?  Yes?"

"Yes, yes."

Their conversation was interrupted by Mademoiselle Linon, who
with an affected but tender smile came to congratulate her
favorite pupil.  Before she had gone, the servants came in with
their congratulations.  Then relations arrived, and there began
that state of blissful absurdity from which Levin did not emerge
till the day after his wedding.  Levin was in a continual state
of awkwardness and discomfort, but the intensity of his happiness
went on all the while increasing.  He felt continually that a
great deal was being expected of him--what, he did not know; and
he did everything he was told, and it all gave him happiness.  He
had thought his engagement would have nothing about it like
others, that the ordinary conditions of engaged couples would
spoil his special happiness; but it ended in his doing exactly as
other people did, and his happiness being only increased thereby
and becoming more and more special, more and more unlike anything
that had ever happened.

"Now we shall have sweetmeats to eat," said Mademoiselle Linon--
and Levin drove off to buy sweetmeats.

"Well, I'm very glad," said Sviazhsky.  "I advise you to get the
bouquets from Fomin's."

"Oh, are they wanted?"  And he drove to Fomin's.

His brother offered to lend him money, as he would have so many
expenses, presents to give....

"Oh, are presents wanted?"  And he galloped to Foulde's.

And at the confectioner's, and at Fomin's, and at Foulde's he saw
that he was expected; that they were pleased to see him, and
prided themselves on his happiness, just as every one whom he had
to do with during those days.  What was extraordinary was that
everyone not only liked him, but even people previously
unsympathetic, cold, and callous, were enthusiastic over him,
gave way to him in everything, treated his feeling with
tenderness and delicacy, and shared his conviction that he was
the happiest man in the world because his betrothed was beyond
perfection.  Kitty too felt the same thing.  When Countess
Nordston ventured to hint that she had hoped for something
better, Kitty was so angry and proved so conclusively that
nothing in the world could be better than Levin, that Countess
Nordston had to admit it, and in Kitty's presence never met Levin
without a smile of ecstatic admiration.

The confession he had promised was the one painful incident of
this time.  He consulted the old prince, and with his sanction
gave Kitty his diary, in which there was written the confession
that tortured him.  He had written this diary at the time with a
view to his future wife.  Two things caused him anguish: his lack
of purity and his lack of faith.  His confession of unbelief
passed unnoticed.  She was religious, had never doubted the
truths of religion, but his external unbelief did not affect her
in the least.  Through love she knew all his soul, and in his
soul she saw what she wanted, and that such a state of soul
should be called unbelieving was to her a matter of no account.
The other confession set her weeping bitterly.

Levin, not without an inner struggle, handed her his diary.  He
knew that between him and her there could not be, and should not
be, secrets, and so he had decided that so it must be.  But he
had not realized what an effect it would have on her, he had not
put himself in her place.  It was only when the same evening he
came to their house before the theater, went into her room and
saw her tear-stained, pitiful, sweet face, miserable with
suffering he had caused and nothing could undo, he felt the abyss
that separated his shameful past from her dovelike purity, and
was appalled at what he had done.

"Take them, take these dreadful books!" she said, pushing away
the notebooks lying before her on the table.  "Why did you give
them me?  No, it was better anyway," she added, touched by his
despairing face.  "But it's awful, awful!"

His head sank, and he was silent.  He could say nothing.

"You can't forgive me," he whispered.

"Yes, I forgive you; but it's terrible!"

But his happiness was so immense that this confession did not
shatter it, it only added another shade to it.  She forgave him;
but from that time more than ever he considered himself unworthy
of her, morally bowed down lower than ever before her, and prized
more highly than ever his undeserved happiness.



Chapter 17


Unconsciously going over in his memory the conversations that had
taken place during and after dinner, Alexey Alexandrovitch
returned to his solitary room.  Darya Alexandrovna's words about
forgiveness had aroused in him nothing but annoyance.  The
applicability or non-applicability of the Christian precept to
his own case was too difficult a question to be discussed
lightly, and this question had long ago been answered by Alexey
Alexandrovitch in the negative.  Of all that had been said, what
stuck most in his memory was the phrase of stupid, good-natured
Turovtsin--"_Acted like a man, he did!  Called him out and shot
him!_"  Everyone had apparently shared this feeling, though from
politeness they had not expressed it.

"But the matter is settled, it's useless thinking about it,"
Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself.  And thinking of nothing but
the journey before him, and the revision work he had to do, he
went into his room and asked the porter who escorted him where
his man was.  The porter said that the man had only just gone
out.  Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered tea to be sent him, sat down
to the table, and taking the guidebook, began considering the
route of his journey.

"Two telegrams," said his manservant, coming into the room.  "I
beg your pardon, your excellency; I'd only just that minute gone
out."

Alexey Alexandrovitch took the telegrams and opened them.  The
first telegram was the announcement of Stremov's appointment to
the very post Karenin had coveted.  Alexey Alexandrovitch flung
the telegram down, and flushing a little, got up and began to
pace up and down the room.  "_Quos vult perdere dementat_," he
said, meaning by _quos_ the persons responsible for this
appointment.  He was not so much annoyed that he had not received
the post, that he had been conspicuously passed over; but it was
incomprehensible, amazing to him that they did not see that the
wordy phrase-monger Stremov was the last man fit for it.  How
could they fail to see how they were ruining themselves, lowering
their _prestige_ by this appointment?

"Something else in the same line," he said to himself bitterly,
opening the second telegram.  The telegram was from his wife.
Her name, written in blue pencil, "Anna," was the first thing
that caught his eye.  "I am dying; I beg, I implore you to come.
I shall die easier with your forgiveness," he read.  He smiled
contemptuously, and flung down the telegram.  That this was a
trick and a fraud, of that, he thought for the first minute,
there could be no doubt.

"There is no deceit she would stick at.  She was near her
confinement.  Perhaps it is the confinement.  But what can be
their aim?  To legitimize the child, to compromise me, and
prevent a divorce," he thought.  "But something was said in it: I
am dying...."  He read the telegram again, and suddenly the plain
meaning of what was said in it struck him.

"And if it is true?" he said to himself.  "If it is true that in
the moment of agony and nearness to death she is genuinely
penitent, and I, taking it for a trick, refuse to go?  That would
not only be cruel, and everyone would blame me, but it would be
stupid on my part."

"Piotr, call a coach; I am going to Petersburg," he said to his
servant.

Alexey Alexandrovitch decided that he would go to Petersburg and
see his wife.  If her illness was a trick, he would say nothing
and go away again.  If she was really in danger, and wished to
see him before her death, he would forgive her if he found her
alive, and pay her the last duties if he came too late.

All the way he thought no more of what he ought to do.

With a sense of weariness and uncleanness from the night spent in
the train, in the early fog of Petersburg Alexey Alexandrovitch
drove through the deserted Nevsky and stared straight before him,
not thinking of what was awaiting him.  He could not think about
it, because in picturing what would happen, he could not drive
away the reflection that her death would at once remove all the
difficulty of his position.  Bakers, closed shops, night-cabmen,
porters sweeping the pavements flashed past his eyes, and he
watched it all, trying to smother the thought of what was
awaiting him, and what he dared not hope for, and yet was hoping
for.  He drove up to the steps.  A sledge and a carriage with the
coachman asleep stood at the entrance.  As he went into the
entry, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as it were, got out his resolution
from the remotest corner of his brain, and mastered it
thoroughly.  Its meaning ran: "If it's a trick, then calm
contempt and departure.  If truth, do what is proper."

The porter opened the door before Alexey Alexandrovitch rang.
The porter, Kapitonitch, looked queer in an old coat, without a
tie, and in slippers.

"How is your mistress?"

"A successful confinement yesterday."

Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped short and turned white.  He felt
distinctly now how intensely he had longed for her death.

"And how is she?"

Korney in his morning apron ran downstairs.

"Very ill," he answered.  "There was a consultation yesterday,
and the doctor's here now."

"Take my things," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and feeling some
relief at the news that there was still hope of her death, he
went into the hall.

On the hatstand there was a military overcoat.  Alexey
Alexandrovitch noticed it and asked:

"Who is here?"

"The doctor, the midwife, and Count Vronsky."

Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the inner rooms.

In the drawing room there was no one; at the sound of his steps
there came out of her boudoir the midwife in a cap with lilac
ribbons.

She went up to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and with the familiarity
given by the approach of death took him by the arm and drew him
towards the bedroom.

"Thank God you've come!  She keeps on about you and nothing but
you," she said.

"Make haste with the ice!" the doctor's peremptory voice said
from the bedroom.

Alexey Alexandrovitch went into her boudoir.

At the table, sitting sideways in a low chair, was Vronsky, his
face hidden in his hands, weeping.  He jumped up at the doctor's
voice, took his hands from his face, and saw Alexey
Alexandrovitch.  Seeing the husband, he was so overwhelmed that
he sat down again, drawing his head down to his shoulders, as if
he wanted to disappear; but he made an effort over himself, got
up and said:

"She is dying.  The doctors say there is no hope.  I am entirely
in your power, only let me be here...though I am at your
disposal.  I..."

Alexey Alexandrovitch, seeing Vronsky's tears, felt a rush of
that nervous emotion always produced in him by the sight of other
people's suffering, and turning away his face, he moved hurriedly
to the door, without hearing the rest of his words.  From the
bedroom came the sound of Anna's voice saying something.  Her
voice was lively, eager, with exceedingly distinct intonations.
Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the bedroom, and went up to the
bed.  She was lying turned with her face towards him.  Her cheeks
were flushed crimson, her eyes glittered, her little white hands
thrust out from the sleeves of her dressing gown were playing
with the quilt, twisting it about.  It seemed as though she were
not only well and blooming, but in the happiest frame of mind.
She was talking rapidly, musically, and with exceptionally
correct articulation and expressive intonation.

"For Alexey--I am speaking of Alexey Alexandrovitch (what a
strange and awful thing that both are Alexey, isn't it?)--Alexey
would not refuse me.  I should forget, he would forgive....  But
why doesn't he come?  He's so good he doesn't know himself how
good he is.  Ah, my God, what agony!  Give me some water, quick!
Oh, that will be bad for her, my little girl!  Oh, very well
then, give her to a nurse.  Yes, I agree, it's better in fact.
He'll be coming; it will hurt him to see her.  Give her to the
nurse."

"Anna Arkadyevna, he has come.  Here he is!" said the midwife,
trying to attract her attention to Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Oh, what nonsense!" Anna went on, not seeing her husband.  "No,
give her to me; give me my little one!  He has not come yet.  You
say he won't forgive me, because you don't know him.  No one
knows him.  I'm the only one, and it was hard for me even.  His
eyes I ought to know--Seryozha has just the same eyes--and I
can't bear to see them because of it.  Has Seryozha had his
dinner?  I know everyone will forget him.  He would not forget.
Seryozha must be moved into the corner room, and Mariette must be
asked to sleep with him."

All of a sudden she shrank back, was silent; and in terror, as
though expecting a blow, as though to defend herself, she raised
her hands to her face.  She had seen her husband.

"No, no!" she began.  "I am not afraid of him; I am afraid of
death.  Alexey, come here.  I am in a hurry, because I've no
time, I've not long left to live; the fever will begin directly
and I shall understand nothing more.  Now I understand, I
understand it all, I see it all!"

Alexey Alexandrovitch's wrinkled face wore an expression of
agony; he took her by the hand and tried to say something, but he
could not utter it; his lower lip quivered, but he still went on
struggling with his emotion, and only now and then glanced at
her.  And each time he glanced at her, he saw her eyes gazing at
him with such passionate and triumphant tenderness as he had
never seen in them.

"Wait a minute, you don't know...stay a little, stay!..."  She
stopped, as though collecting her ideas.  "Yes," she began; "yes,
yes, yes.  This is what I wanted to say.  Don't be surprised at
me.  I'm still the same....  But there is another woman in me,
I'm afraid of her: she loved that man, and I tried to hate you,
and could not forget about her that used to be.  I'm not that
woman.  Now I'm my real self, all myself.  I'm dying now, I know
I shall die, ask him.  Even now I feel--see here, the weights on
my feet, on my hands, on my fingers.  My fingers--see how huge
they are!  But this will soon all be over....  Only one thing I
want: forgive me, forgive me quite.  I'm terrible, but my nurse
used to tell me; the holy martyr--what was her name?  She was
worse.  And I'll go to Rome; there's a wilderness, and there I
shall be no trouble to any one, only I'll take Seryozha and the
little one....  No, you can't forgive me!  I know, it can't be
forgiven!  No, no, go away, you're too good!"  She held his hand
in one burning hand, while she pushed him away with the other.

The nervous agitation of Alexey Alexandrovitch kept increasing,
and had by now reached such a point that he ceased to struggle
with it.  He suddenly felt that what he had regarded as nervous
agitation was on the contrary a blissful spiritual condition that
gave him all at once a new happiness he had never known.  He did
not think that the Christian law that he had been all his life
trying to follow, enjoined on him to forgive and love his
enemies; but a glad feeling of love and forgiveness for his
enemies filled his heart.  He knelt down, and laying his head in
the curve of her arm, which burned him as with fire through the
sleeve, he sobbed like a little child.  She put her arm around
his head, moved towards him, and with defiant pride lifted up her
eyes.

"That is he.  I knew him!  Now, forgive me, everyone, forgive
me!...  They've come again; why don't they go away?...  Oh, take
these cloaks off me!"

The doctor unloosed her hands, carefully laying her on the
pillow, and covered her up to the shoulders.  She lay back
submissively, and looked before her with beaming eyes.

"Remember one thing, that I needed nothing but forgiveness, and
I want nothing more....  Why doesn't _he_ come?" she said, turning
to the door towards Vronsky.  "Do come, do come!  Give him your
hand."

Vronsky came to the side of the bed, and seeing Anna, again hid
his face in his hands.

"Uncover your face--look at him!  He's a saint," she said.  "Oh!
uncover your face, do uncover it!" she said angrily.  "Alexey
Alexandrovitch, do uncover his face!  I want to see him."

Alexey Alexandrovitch took Vronsky's hands and drew them away
from his face, which was awful with the expression of agony and
shame upon it.

"Give him your hand.  Forgive him."

Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, not attempting to
restrain the tears that streamed from his eyes.

"Thank God, thank God!" she said, "now everything is ready.  Only
to stretch my legs a little.  There, that's capital.  How badly
these flowers are done--not a bit like a violet," she said,
pointing to the hangings.  "My God, my God! when will it end?
Give me some morphine.  Doctor, give me some morphine! Oh, my
God, my God!"

And she tossed about on the bed.

The doctors said that it was puerperal fever, and that it was
ninety-nine chances in a hundred it would end in death.  The
whole day long there was fever, delirium, and unconsciousness.
At midnight the patient lay without consciousness, and almost
without pulse.

The end was expected every minute.

Vronsky had gone home, but in the morning he came to inquire, and
Alexey Alexandrovitch meeting him in the hall, said: "Better
stay, she might ask for you," and himself led him to his wife's
boudoir.  Towards morning, there was a return again of
excitement, rapid thought and talk, and again it ended in
unconsciousness.  On the third day it was the same thing, and the
doctors said there was hope.  That day Alexey Alexandrovitch went
into the boudoir where Vronsky was sitting, and closing the door
sat down opposite him.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch," said Vronsky, feeling that a statement
of the position was coming, "I can't speak, I can't understand.
Spare me!  However hard it is for you, believe me, it is more
terrible for me."

He would have risen; but Alexey Alexandrovitch took him by the
hand and said:

"I beg you to hear me out; it is necessary.  I must explain my
feelings, the feelings that have guided me and will guide me, so
that you may not be in error regarding me.  You know I had
resolved on a divorce, and had even begun to take proceedings.
I won't conceal from you that in beginning this I was in
uncertainty, I was in misery; I will confess that I was pursued
by a desire to revenge myself on you and on her.  When I got the
telegram, I came here with the same feelings; I will say more, I
longed for her death.  But...."  He paused, pondering whether to
disclose or not to disclose his feeling to him.  "But I saw her
and forgave her.  And the happiness of forgiveness has revealed
to me my duty.  I forgive completely.  I would offer the other
cheek, I would give my cloak if my coat be taken.  I pray to God
only not to take from me the bliss of forgiveness!"

Tears stood in his eyes, and the luminous, serene look in them
impressed Vronsky.

"This is my position: you can trample me in the mud, make me the
laughing-stock of the world, I will not abandon her, and I will
never utter a word of reproach to you," Alexey Alexandrovitch
went on.  "My duty is clearly marked for me; I ought to be with
her, and I will be.  If she wishes to see you, I will let you
know, but now I suppose it would be better for you to go away."

He got up, and sobs cut short his words.  Vronsky too was getting
up, and in a stooping, not yet erect posture, looked up at him
from under his brows.  He did not understand Alexey
Alexandrovitch's feeling, but he felt that it was something
higher and even unattainable for him with his view of life.



Chapter 18


After the conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch, Vronsky went
out onto the steps of the Karenins' house and stood still, with
difficulty remembering where he was, and where he ought to walk
or drive.  He felt disgraced, humiliated, guilty, and deprived of
all possibility of washing away his humiliation.  He felt thrust
out of the beaten track along which he had so proudly and lightly
walked till then.  All the habits and rules of his life that had
seemed so firm, had turned out suddenly false and inapplicable.
The betrayed husband, who had figured till that time as a
pitiful creature, an incidental and somewhat ludicrous obstacle
to his happiness, had suddenly been summoned by her herself,
elevated to an awe-inspiring pinnacle, and on the pinnacle that
husband had shown himself, not malignant, not false, not
ludicrous, but kind and straightforward and large.  Vronsky could
not but feel this, and the parts were suddenly reversed.  Vronsky
felt his elevation and his own abasement, his truth and his own
falsehood.  He felt that the husband was magnanimous even in his
sorrow, while he had been base and petty in his deceit.  But this
sense of his own humiliation before the man he had unjustly
despised made up only a small part of his misery.  He felt
unutterably wretched now, for his passion for Anna, which had
seemed to him of late to be growing cooler, now that he knew he
had lost her forever, was stronger than ever it had been.  He had
seen all of her in her illness, had come to know her very soul,
and it seemed to him that he had never loved her till then.  And
now when he had learned to know her, to love her as she should be
loved, he had been humiliated before her, and had lost her
forever, leaving with her nothing of himself but a shameful
memory.  Most terrible of all had been his ludicrous, shameful
position when Alexey Alexandrovitch had pulled his hands away
from his humiliated face.  He stood on the steps of the Karenins'
house like one distraught, and did not know what to do.

"A sledge, sir?" asked the porter.

"Yes, a sledge."

On getting home, after three sleepless nights, Vronsky, without
undressing, lay down flat on the sofa, clasping his hands and
laying his head on them.  His head was heavy.  Images, memories,
and ideas of the strangest description followed one another with
extraordinary rapidity and vividness.  First it was the medicine
he had poured out for the patient and spilt over the spoon, then
the midwife's white hands, then the queer posture of Alexey
Alexandrovitch on the floor beside the bed.

"To sleep!  To forget!" he said to himself with the serene
confidence of a healthy man that if he is tired and sleepy, he
will go to sleep at once.  And the same instant his head did
begin to feel drowsy and he began to drop off into forgetfulness.
The waves of the sea of unconsciousness had begun to meet over
his head, when all at once--it was as though a violent shock of
electricity had passed over him.  He started so that he leaped up
on the springs of the sofa, and leaning on his arms got in a
panic onto his knees.  His eyes were wide open as though he had
never been asleep.  The heaviness in his head and the weariness
in his limbs that he had felt a minute before had suddenly gone.

"You may trample me in the mud," he heard Alexey Alexandrovitch's
words and saw him standing before him, and saw Anna's face with
its burning flush and glittering eyes, gazing with love and
tenderness not at him but at Alexey Alexandrovitch; he saw his
own, as he fancied, foolish and ludicrous figure when Alexey
Alexandrovitch took his hands away from his face.  He stretched
out his legs again and flung himself on the sofa in the same
position and shut his eyes.

"To sleep!  To forget!" he repeated to himself.  But with his
eyes shut he saw more distinctly than ever Anna's face as it had
been on the memorable evening before the races.

"That is not and will not be, and she wants to wipe it out of her
memory.  But I cannot live without it.  How can we be reconciled?
how can we be reconciled?" he said aloud, and unconsciously began
to repeat these words.  This repetition checked the rising up of
fresh images and memories, which he felt were thronging in his
brain.  But repeating words did not check his imagination for
long.  Again in extraordinarily rapid succession his best moments
rose before his mind, and then his recent humiliation.  "Take
away his hands," Anna's voice says.  He takes away his hands and
feels the shamestruck and idiotic expression of his face.

He still lay down, trying to sleep, though he felt there was not
the smallest hope of it, and kept repeating stray words from some
chain of thought, trying by this to check the rising flood of
fresh images.  He listened, and heard in a strange, mad whisper
words repeated: "I did not appreciate it, did not make enough of
it.  I did not appreciate it, did not make enough of it."

"What's this?  Am I going out of my mind?" he said to himself.
"Perhaps.  What makes men go out of their minds; what makes men
shoot themselves?" he answered himself, and opening his eyes, he
saw with wonder an embroidered cushion beside him, worked by
Varya, his brother's wife.  He touched the tassel of the cushion,
and tried to think of Varya, of when he had seen her last.  But
to think of anything extraneous was an agonizing effort.  "No, I
must sleep!"  He moved the cushion up, and pressed his head into
it, but he had to make an effort to keep his eyes shut.  He
jumped up and sat down.  "That's all over for me," he said to
himself.  "I must think what to do.  What is left?"  His mind
rapidly ran through his life apart from his love of Anna.

"Ambition?  Serpuhovskoy?  Society?  The court?"  He could not
come to a pause anywhere.  All of it had had meaning before, but
now there was no reality in it.  He got up from the sofa, took
off his coat, undid his belt, and uncovering his hairy chest to
breathe more freely, walked up and down the room.  "This is how
people go mad," he repeated, "and how they shoot themselves...to
escape humiliation," he added slowly.

He went to the door and closed it, then with fixed eyes and
clenched teeth he went up to the table, took a revolver, looked
round him, turned it to a loaded barrel, and sank into thought.
For two minutes, his head bent forward with an expression of an
intense effort of thought, he stood with the revolver in his
hand, motionless, thinking.

"Of course," he said to himself, as though a logical, continuous,
and clear chain of reasoning had brought him to an indubitable
conclusion.  In reality this "of course," that seemed convincing
to him, was simply the result of exactly the same circle of
memories and images through which he had passed ten times already
during the last hour--memories of happiness lost forever.  There
was the same conception of the senselessness of everything to
come in life, the same consciousness of humiliation.  Even the
sequence of these images and emotions was the same.

"Of course," he repeated, when for the third time his thought
passed again round the same spellbound circle of memories and
images, and pulling the revolver to the left side of his chest,
and clutching it vigorously with his whole hand, as it were,
squeezing it in his fist, he pulled the trigger.  He did not hear
the sound of the shot, but a violent blow on his chest sent him
reeling.  He tried to clutch at the edge of the table, dropped
the revolver, staggered, and sat down on the ground, looking
about him in astonishment.  He did not recognize his room,
looking up from the ground, at the bent legs of the table, at the
wastepaper basket, and the tiger-skin rug.  The hurried, creaking
steps of his servant coming through the drawing room brought him
to his senses.  He made an effort at thought, and was aware that
he was on the floor; and seeing blood on the tiger-skin rug and
on his arm, he knew he had shot himself.

"Idiotic!  Missed!" he said, fumbling after the revolver.  The
revolver was close beside him--he sought further off.  Still
feeling for it, he stretched out to the other side, and not being
strong enough to keep his balance, fell over, streaming with
blood.

The elegant, whiskered manservant, who used to be continually
complaining to his acquaintances of the delicacy of his nerves,
was so panic-stricken on seeing his master lying on the floor,
that he left him losing blood while he ran for assistance.  An
hour later Varya, his brother's wife, had arrived, and with the
assistance of three doctors, whom she had sent for in all
directions, and who all appeared at the same moment, she got the
wounded man to bed, and remained to nurse him.



Chapter 19


The mistake made by Alexey Alexandrovitch in that, when preparing
for seeing his wife, he had overlooked the possibility that her
repentance might be sincere, and he might forgive her, and she
might not die--this mistake was two months after his return from
Moscow brought home to him in all its significance.  But the
mistake made by him had arisen not simply from his having
overlooked that contingency, but also from the fact that until
that day of his interview with his dying wife, he had not known
his own heart.  At his sick wife's bedside he had for the first
time in his life given way to that feeling of sympathetic
suffering always roused in him by the sufferings of others, and
hitherto looked on by him with shame as a harmful weakness.  And
pity for her, and remorse for having desired her death, and most
of all, the joy of forgiveness, made him at once conscious, not
simply of the relief of his own sufferings, but of a spiritual
peace he had never experienced before.  He suddenly felt that the
very thing that was the source of his sufferings had become the
source of his spiritual joy; that what had seemed insoluble while
he was judging, blaming, and hating, had become clear and simple
when he forgave and loved.

He forgave his wife and pitied her for her sufferings and her
remorse.  He forgave Vronsky, and pitied him, especially after
reports reached him of his despairing action.  He felt more for
his son than before.  And he blamed himself now for having taken
too little interest in him.  But for the little newborn baby he
felt a quite peculiar sentiment, not of pity, only, but of
tenderness.  At first, from a feeling of compassion alone, he had
been interested in the delicate little creature, who was not his
child, and who was cast on one side during her mother's illness,
and would certainly have died if he had not troubled about her,
and he did not himself observe how fond he became of her.  He
would go into the nursery several times a day, and sit there for
a long while, so that the nurses, who were at first afraid of
him, got quite used to his presence.  Sometimes for half an hour
at a stretch he would sit silently gazing at the saffron-red,
downy, wrinkled face of the sleeping baby, watching the movements
of the frowning brows, and the fat little hands, with clenched
fingers, that rubbed the little eyes and nose.  At such moments
particularly, Alexey Alexandrovitch had a sense of perfect peace
and inward harmony, and saw nothing extraordinary in his
position, nothing that ought to be changed.

But as time went on, he saw more and more distinctly that however
natural the position now seemed to him, he would not long be
allowed to remain in it.  He felt that besides the blessed
spiritual force controlling his soul, there was another, a brutal
force, as powerful, or more powerful, which controlled his life,
and that this force would not allow him that humble peace he
longed for.  He felt that everyone was looking at him with
inquiring wonder, that he was not understood, and that something
was expected of him.  Above all, he felt the instability and
unnaturalness of his relations with his wife.

When the softening effect of the near approach of death had
passed away, Alexey Alexandrovitch began to notice that Anna was
afraid of him, ill at ease with him, and could not look him
straight in the face.  She seemed to be wanting, and not daring,
to tell him something; and as though foreseeing their present
relations could not continue, she seemed to be expecting
something from him.

Towards the end of February it happened that Anna's baby
daughter, who had been named Anna too, fell ill.  Alexey
Alexandrovitch was in the nursery in the morning, and leaving
orders for the doctor to be sent for, he went to his office.  On
finishing his work, he returned home at four.  Going into the
hall he saw a handsome groom, in a braided livery and a bear fur
cape, holding a white fur cloak.

"Who is here?" asked Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Princess Elizaveta Federovna Tverskaya," the groom answered, and
it seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch that he grinned.

During all this difficult time Alexey Alexandrovitch had noticed
that his worldly acquaintances, especially women, took a peculiar
interest in him and his wife.  All these acquaintances he
observed with difficulty concealing their mirth at something; the
same mirth that he had perceived in the lawyer's eyes, and just
now in the eyes of this groom.  Everyone seemed, somehow, hugely
delighted, as though they had just been at a wedding.  When they
met him, with ill-disguised enjoyment they inquired after his
wife's health.  The presence of Princess Tverskaya was unpleasant
to Alexey Alexandrovitch from the memories associated with her,
and also because he disliked her, and he went straight to the
nursery.  In the day nursery Seryozha, leaning on the table with
his legs on a chair, was drawing and chatting away merrily.  The
English governess, who had during Anna's illness replaced the
French one, was sitting near the boy knitting a shawl.  She
hurriedly got up, curtseyed, and pulled Seryozha.

Alexey Alexandrovitch stroked his son's hair, answered the
governess's inquiries about his wife, and asked what the doctor
had said of the baby.

"The doctor said it was nothing serious, and he ordered a bath,
sir."

"But she is still in pain," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, listening
to the baby's screaming in the next room.

"I think it's the wet-nurse, sir," the Englishwoman said firmly.

"What makes you think so?" he asked, stopping short.

"It's just as it was at Countess Paul's, sir.  They gave the baby
medicine, and it turned out that the baby was simply hungry: the
nurse had no milk, sir."

Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and after standing still a few
seconds he went in at the other door.  The baby was lying with
its head thrown back, stiffening itself in the nurse's arms, and
would not take the plump breast offered it; and it never ceased
screaming in spite of the double hushing of the wet-nurse and the
other nurse, who was bending over her.

"Still no better?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"She's very restless," answered the nurse in a whisper.

"Miss Edwarde says that perhaps the wet-nurse has no milk," he
said.

"I think so too, Alexey Alexandrovitch."

"Then why didn't you say so?"

"Who's one to say it to?  Anna Arkadyevna still ill..." said the
nurse discontentedly.

The nurse was an old servant of the family.  And in her simple
words there seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch an allusion to his
position.

The baby screamed louder than ever, struggling and sobbing.  The
nurse, with a gesture of despair, went to it, took it from the
wet-nurse's arms, and began walking up and down, rocking it.

"You must ask the doctor to examine the wet-nurse," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.  The smartly dressed and healthy-looking nurse,
frightened at the idea of losing her place, muttered something to
herself, and covering her bosom, smiled contemptuously at the
idea of doubts being cast on her abundance of milk.  In that
smile, too, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw a sneer at his position.

"Luckless child!" said the nurse, hushing the baby, and still
walking up and down with it.

Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, and with a despondent and
suffering face watched the nurse walking to and fro.

When the child at last was still, and had been put in a deep bed,
and the nurse, after smoothing the little pillow, had left her,
Alexey Alexandrovitch got up, and walking awkwardly on tiptoe,
approached the baby.  For a minute he was still, and with the
same despondent face gazed at the baby; but all at once a smile,
that moved his hair and the skin of his forehead, came out on his
face, and he went as softly out of the room.

In the dining room he rang the bell, and told the servant who
came in to send again for the doctor.  He felt vexed with his
wife for not being anxious about this exquisite baby, and in this
vexed humor he had no wish to go to her; he had no wish, either,
to see Princess Betsy.  But his wife might wonder why he did not
go to her as usual; and so, overcoming his disinclination, he
went towards the bedroom.  As he walked over the soft rug towards
the door, he could not help overhearing a conversation he did not
want to hear.

"If he hadn't been going away, I could have understood your
answer and his too.  But your husband ought to be above that,"
Betsy was saying.

"It's not for my husband; for myself I don't wish it.  Don't say
that!" answered Anna's excited voice.

"Yes, but you must care to say good-bye to a man who has shot
himself on your account...."

"That's just why I don't want to."

With a dismayed and guilty expression, Alexey Alexandrovitch
stopped and would have gone back unobserved.  But reflecting that
this would be undignified, he turned back again, and clearing his
throat, he went up to the bedroom.  The voices were silent, and
he went in.

Anna, in a gray dressing gown, with a crop of short clustering
black curls on her round head, was sitting on a settee.  The
eagerness died out of her face, as it always did, at the sight of
her husband; she dropped her head and looked round uneasily at
Betsy.  Betsy, dressed in the height of the latest fashion, in a
hat that towered somewhere over her head like a shade on a lamp,
in a blue dress with violet crossway stripes slanting one way on
the bodice and the other way on the skirt, was sitting beside
Anna, her tall flat figure held erect.  Bowing her head, she
greeted Alexey Alexandrovitch with an ironical smile.

"Ah!" she said, as though surprised.  "I'm very glad you're at
home.  You never put in an appearance anywhere, and I haven't
seen you ever since Anna has been ill.  I have heard all about
it--your anxiety.  Yes, you're a wonderful husband!" she said,
with a meaning and affable air, as though she were bestowing an
order of magnanimity on him for his conduct to his wife.

Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed frigidly, and kissing his wife's
hand, asked how she was.

"Better, I think," she said, avoiding his eyes.

"But you've rather a feverish-looking color," he said, laying
stress on the word "feverish."

"We've been talking too much," said Betsy.  "I feel it's
selfishness on my part, and I am going away."

She got up, but Anna, suddenly flushing, quickly caught at her
hand.

"No, wait a minute, please.  I must tell you...no, you." she
turned to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and her neck and brow were
suffused with crimson.  "I won't and can't keep anything secret
from you," she said.

Alexey Alexandrovitch cracked his fingers and bowed his head.

"Betsy's been telling me that Count Vronsky wants to come here to
say good-bye before his departure for Tashkend."  She did not
look at her husband, and was evidently in haste to have
everything out, however hard it might be for her.  "I told her I
could not receive him."

"You said, my dear, that it would depend on Alexey
Alexandrovitch," Betsy corrected her.

"Oh, no, I can't receive him; and what object would there...."
She stopped suddenly, and glanced inquiringly at her husband (he
did not look at her).  "In short, I don't wish it...."

Alexey Alexandrovitch advanced and would have taken her hand.

Her first impulse was to jerk back her hand from the damp hand
with big swollen veins that sought hers, but with an obvious
effort to control herself she pressed his hand.

"I am very grateful to you for your confidence, but..." he said,
feeling with confusion and annoyance that what he could decide
easily and clearly by himself, he could not discuss before
Princess Tverskaya, who to him stood for the incarnation of that
brute force which would inevitably control him in the life he led
in the eyes of the world, and hinder him from giving way to his
feeling of love and forgiveness.  He stopped short, looking at
Princess Tverskaya.

"Well, good-bye, my darling," said Betsy, getting up.  She kissed
Anna, and went out.  Alexey Alexandrovitch escorted her out.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch!  I know you are a truly magnanimous man,"
said Betsy, stopping in the little drawing-room, and with special
warmth shaking hands with him once more.  "I am an outsider, but
I so love her and respect you that I venture to advise.  Receive
him.  Alexey Vronsky is the soul of honor, and he is going away
to Tashkend."

"Thank you, princess, for your sympathy and advice.  But the
question of whether my wife can or cannot see anyone she must
decide herself."

He said this from habit, lifting his brows with dignity, and
reflected immediately that whatever his words might be, there
could be no dignity in his position.  And he saw this by the
suppressed, malicious, and ironical smile with which Betsy
glanced at him after this phrase.



Chapter 20


Alexey Alexandrovitch took leave of Betsy in the drawing room,
and went to his wife.  She was lying down, but hearing his steps
she sat up hastily in her former attitude, and looked in a scared
way at him.  He saw she had been crying.

"I am very grateful for your confidence in me."  He repeated
gently in Russian the phrase he had said in Betsy's presence in
French, and sat down beside her.  When he spoke to her in
Russian, using the Russian "thou" of intimacy and affection, it
was insufferably irritating to Anna.  "And I am very grateful for
your decision.  I, too, imagine that since he is going away,
there is no sort of necessity for Count Vronsky to come here.
However, if..."

"But I've said so already, so why repeat it?" Anna suddenly
interrupted him with an irritation she could not succeed in
repressing.  "No sort of necessity," she thought, "for a man to
come and say good-bye to the woman he loves, for whom he was
ready to ruin himself, and has ruined himself, and who cannot
live without him.  No sort of necessity!" she compressed her
lips, and dropped her burning eyes to his hands with their
swollen veins.  They were rubbing each other.

"Let us never speak of it," she added more calmly.

"I have left this question to you to decide, and I am very glad
to see..." Alexey Alexandrovitch was beginning.

"That my wish coincides with your own," she finished quickly,
exasperated at his talking so slowly while she knew beforehand
all he would say.

"Yes," he assented; "and Princess Tverskaya's interference in the
most difficult private affairs is utterly uncalled for.  She
especially..."

"I don't believe a word of what's said about her," said Anna
quickly.  "I know she really cares for me."

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed and said nothing.  She played
nervously with the tassel of her dressing-gown, glancing at him
with that torturing sensation of physical repulsion for which she
blamed herself, though she could not control it.  Her only desire
now was to be rid of his oppressive presence.

"I have just sent for the doctor," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"I am very well; what do I want the doctor for?"

"No, the little one cries, and they say the nurse hasn't enough
milk."

"Why didn't you let me nurse her, when I begged to?  Anyway"
(Alexey Alexandrovitch knew what was meant by that "anyway"),
"she's a baby, and they're killing her."  She rang the bell and
ordered the baby to be brought her.  "I begged to nurse her, I
wasn't allowed to, and now I'm blamed for it."

"I don't blame..."

"Yes, you do blame me!  My God! why didn't I die!"  And she broke
into sobs.  "Forgive me, I'm nervous, I'm unjust," she said,
controlling herself, "but do go away..."

"No, it can't go on like this," Alexey Alexandrovitch said to
himself decidedly as he left his wife's room.

Never had the impossibility of his position in the world's eyes,
and his wife's hatred of him, and altogether the might of that
mysterious brutal force that guided his life against his
spiritual inclinations, and exacted conformity with its decrees
and change in his attitude to his wife, been presented to him
with such distinctness as that day.  He saw clearly that all the
world and his wife expected of him something, but what exactly,
he could not make out.  He felt that this was rousing in his soul
a feeling of anger destructive of his peace of mind and of all
the good of his achievement.  He believed that for Anna herself
it would be better to break off all relations with Vronsky; but
if they all thought this out of the question, he was even ready
to allow these relations to be renewed, so long as the children
were not disgraced, and he was not deprived of them nor forced to
change his position.  Bad as this might be, it was anyway better
than a rupture, which would put her in a hopeless and shameful
position, and deprive him of everything he cared for.  But he
felt helpless; he knew beforehand that every one was against him,
and that he would not be allowed to do what seemed to him now so
natural and right, but would be forced to do what was wrong,
though it seemed the proper thing to them.



Chapter 21


Before Betsy had time to walk out of the drawing-room, she was
met in the doorway by Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just come from
Yeliseev's, where a consignment of fresh oysters had been
received.

"Ah! princess! what a delightful meeting!" he began.  "I've been
to see you."

"A meeting for one minute, for I'm going," said Betsy, smiling
and putting on her glove.

"Don't put on your glove yet, princess; let me kiss your hand.
There's nothing I'm so thankful to the revival of the old
fashions for as the kissing the hand." He kissed Betsy's hand.
"When shall we see each other?"

"You don't deserve it," answered Betsy, smiling.

"Oh, yes, I deserve a great deal, for I've become a most serious
person.  I don't only manage my own affairs, but other people's
too," he said, with a significant expression.

"Oh, I'm so glad!" answered Betsy, at once understanding that he
was speaking of Anna.  And going back into the drawing room, they
stood in a corner.  "He's killing her," said Betsy in a whisper
full of meaning.  "It's impossible, impossible..."

"I'm so glad you think so," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, shaking his
head with a serious and sympathetically distressed expression,
"that's what I've come to Petersburg for."

"The whole town's talking of it," she said.  "It's an impossible
position.  She pines and pines away.  He doesn't understand that
she's one of those women who can't trifle with their feelings.
One of two things: either let him take her away, act with
energy, or give her a divorce.  This is stifling her."

"Yes, yes...just so..." Oblonsky said, sighing.  "That's what
I've come for.  At least not solely for that...I've been made a
_Kammerherr_; of course, one has to say thank you.  But the chief
thing was having to settle this."

"Well, God help you!" said Betsy.

After accompanying Betsy to the outside hall, once more kissing
her hand above the glove, at the point where the pulse beats, and
murmuring to her such unseemly nonsense that she did not know
whether to laugh or be angry, Stepan Arkadyevitch went to his
sister.  He found her in tears.

Although he happened to be bubbling over with good spirits,
Stepan Arkadyevitch immediately and quite naturally fell into the
sympathetic, poetically emotional tone which harmonized with her
mood.  He asked her how she was, and how she had spent the
morning.

"Very, very miserably.  Today and this morning and all past days
and days to come," she said.

"I think you're giving way to pessimism.  You must rouse
yourself, you must look life in the face.  I know it's hard,
but..."

"I have heard it said that women love men even for their vices,"
Anna began suddenly, "but I hate him for his virtues.  I can't
live with him.  Do you understand? the sight of him has a
physical effect on me, it makes me beside myself.  I can't, I
can't live with him.  What am I to do?  I have been unhappy, and
used to think one couldn't be more unhappy, but the awful state
of things I am going through now, I could never have conceived.
Would you believe it, that knowing he's a good man, a splendid
man, that I'm not worth his little finger, still I hate him.  I
hate him for his generosity.  And there's nothing left for me
but..."

She would have said death, but Stepan Arkadyevitch would not let
her finish.

"You are ill and overwrought," he said; "believe me, you're
exaggerating dreadfully.  There's nothing so terrible in it."

And Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled.  No one else in Stepan
Arkadyevitch's place, having to do with such despair, would have
ventured to smile (the smile would have seemed brutal); but in
his smile there was so much of sweetness and almost feminine
tenderness that his smile did not wound, but softened and
soothed.  His gentle, soothing words and smiles were as soothing
and softening as almond oil.  And Anna soon felt this.

"No, Stiva," she said, "I'm lost, lost! worse than lost! I can't
say yet that all is over; on the contrary, I feel that it's not
over.  I'm an overstrained string that must snap.  But it's not
ended yet...and it will have a fearful end."

"No matter, we must let the string be loosened, little by little.
There's no position from which there is no way of escape."

"I have thought, and thought.  Only one..."

Again he knew from her terrified eyes that this one way of escape
in her thought was death, and he would not let her say it.

"Not at all," he said.  "Listen to me.  You can't see your own
position as I can.  Let me tell you candidly my opinion." Again
he smiled discreetly his almond-oil smile.  "I'll begin from the
beginning.  You married a man twenty years older than yourself.
You married him without love and not knowing what love was.  It
was a mistake, let's admit."

"A fearful mistake!" said Anna.

"But I repeat, it's an accomplished fact.  Then you had, let us
say, the misfortune to love a man not your husband.  That was a
misfortune; but that, too, is an accomplished fact.  And your
husband knew it and forgave it."  He stopped at each sentence,
waiting for her to object, but she made no answer.  "That's so.
Now the question is: can you go on living with your husband?  Do
you wish it?  Does he wish it?"

"I know nothing, nothing."

"But you said yourself that you can't endure him."

"No, I didn't say so.  I deny it.  I can't tell, I don't know
anything about it."

"Yes, but let..."

"You can't understand.  I feel I'm lying head downwards in a sort
of pit, but I ought not to save myself.  And I can't . . ."

"Never mind, we'll slip something under and pull you out.  I
understand you: I understand that you can't take it on yourself
to express your wishes, your feelings."

"There's nothing, nothing I wish...except for it to be all
over."

"But he sees this and knows it.  And do you suppose it weighs on
him any less than on you?  You're wretched, he's wretched, and
what good can come of it? while divorce would solve the
difficulty completely."  With some effort Stepan Arkadyevitch
brought out his central idea, and looked significantly at her.

She said nothing, and shook her cropped head in dissent.  But
from the look in her face, that suddenly brightened into its old
beauty, he saw that if she did not desire this, it was simply
because it seemed to her unattainable happiness.

"I'm awfully sorry for you!  And how happy I should be if I could
arrange things!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling more boldly.
"Don't speak, don't say a word!  God grant only that I may speak
as I feel.  I'm going to him."

Anna looked at him with dreamy, shining eyes, and said nothing.



Chapter 22


Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the same somewhat solemn expression
with which he used to take his presidential chair at his board,
walked into Alexey Alexandrovitch's room.  Alexey Alexandrovitch
was walking about his room with his hands behind his back,
thinking of just what Stepan Arkadyevitch had been discussing
with his wife.

"I'm not interrupting you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, on the
sight of his brother-in-law becoming suddenly aware of a sense of
embarrassment unusual with him.  To conceal this embarrassment he
took out a cigarette case he had just bought that opened in a new
way, and sniffing the leather, took a cigarette out of it.

"No.  Do you want anything?" Alexey Alexandrovitch asked without
eagerness.

"Yes, I wished...I wanted...yes, I wanted to talk to you," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, with surprise aware of an unaccustomed
timidity.

This feeling was so unexpected and so strange that he did not
believe it was the voice of conscience telling him that what he
was meaning to do was wrong.

Stepan Arkadyevitch made an effort and struggled with the
timidity that had come over him.

"I hope you believe in my love for my sister and my sincere
affection and respect for you," he said, reddening.

Alexey Alexandrovitch stood still and said nothing, but his face
struck Stepan Arkadyevitch by its expression of an unresisting
sacrifice.

"I intended...I wanted to have a little talk with you about my
sister and your mutual position," he said, still struggling with
an unaccustomed constraint.

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled mournfully, looked at his
brother-in-law, and without answering went up to the table, took
from it an unfinished letter, and handed it to his
brother-in-law.

"I think unceasingly of the same thing.  And here is what I had
begun writing, thinking I could say it better by letter, and
that my presence irritates her," he said, as he gave him the
letter.

Stepan Arkadyevitch took the letter, looked with incredulous
surprise at the lusterless eyes fixed so immovably on him, and
began to read.

"I see that my presence is irksome to you.  Painful as it is to
me to believe it, I see that it is so, and cannot be otherwise.
I don't blame you, and God is my witness that on seeing you at
the time of your illness I resolved with my whole heart to forget
all that had passed between us and to begin a new life.  I do not
regret, and shall never regret, what I have done; but I have
desired one thing--your good, the good of your soul--and now I
see I have not attained that.  Tell me yourself what will give
you true happiness and peace to your soul.  I put myself entirely
in your hands, and trust to your feeling of what's right."

Stepan Arkadyevitch handed back the letter, and with the same
surprise continued looking at his brother-in-law, not knowing
what to say.  This silence was so awkward for both of them that
Stepan Arkadyevitch's lips began twitching nervously, while he
still gazed without speaking at Karenin's face.

"That's what I wanted to say to her," said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
turning away.

"Yes, yes..." said Stepan Arkadyevitch, not able to answer for
the tears that were choking him.

"Yes, yes, I understand you," he brought out at last.

"I want to know what she would like," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"I am afraid she does not understand her own position.  She is
not a judge," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, recovering himself.  "She
is crushed, simply crushed by your generosity.  If she were to
read this letter, she would be incapable of saying anything, she
would only hang her head lower than ever."

"Yes, but what's to be done in that case? how explain, how find
out her wishes?"

"If you will allow me to give my opinion, I think that it lies
with you to point out directly the steps you consider necessary
to end the position."

"So you consider it must be ended?" Alexey Alexandrovitch
interrupted him.  "But how?" he added, with a gesture of his
hands before his eyes not usual with him.  "I see no possible way
out of it."

"There is some way of getting out of every position," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, standing up and becoming more cheerful.  "There was
a time when you thought of breaking off....  If you are convinced
now that you cannot make each other happy..."

"Happiness may be variously understood.  But suppose that I agree
to everything, that I want nothing: what way is there of getting
out of our position?"

"If you care to know my opinion," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with
the same smile of softening, almond-oil tenderness with which he
had been talking to Anna.  His kindly smile was so winning that
Alexey Alexandrovitch, feeling his own weakness and unconsciously
swayed by it, was ready to believe what Stepan Arkadyevitch was
saying.

"She will never speak out about it.  But one thing is possible,
one thing she might desire," he went on, "that is the cessation
of your relations and all memories associated with them.  To my
thinking, in your position what's essential is the formation of a
new attitude to one another.  And that can only rest on a basis
of freedom on both sides."

"Divorce," Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted, in a tone of
aversion.

"Yes, I imagine that divorce--yes, divorce," Stepan Arkadyevitch
repeated, reddening.  "That is from every point of view the most
rational course for married people who find themselves in the
position you are in.  What can be done if married people find
that life is impossible for them together?  That may always
happen."

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed heavily and closed his eyes.

"There's only one point to be considered: is either of the
parties desirous of forming new ties?  If not, it is very
simple," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, feeling more and more free
from constraint.

Alexey Alexandrovitch, scowling with emotion, muttered something
to himself, and made no answer.  All that seemed so simple to
Stepan Arkadyevitch, Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought over
thousands of times.  And, so far from being simple, it all seemed
to him utterly impossible.  Divorce, the details of which he knew
by this time, seemed to him now out of the question, because the
sense of his own dignity and respect for religion forbade his
taking upon himself a fictitious charge of adultery, and still
more suffering his wife, pardoned and beloved by him, to be
caught in the fact and put to public shame.  Divorce appeared to
him impossible also on other still more weighty grounds.

What would become of his son in case of a divorce?  To leave him
with his mother was out of the question.  The divorced mother
would have her own illegitimate family, in which his position as
a stepson and his education would not be good.  Keep him with
him?  He knew that would be an act of vengeance on his part, and
that he did not want.  But apart from this, what more than all
made divorce seem impossible to Alexey Alexandrovitch was, that
by consenting to a divorce he would be completely ruining Anna.
The saying of Darya Alexandrovna at Moscow, that in deciding on a
divorce he was thinking of himself, and not considering that by
this he would be ruining her irrevocably, had sunk into his
heart.  And connecting this saying with his forgiveness of her,
with his devotion to the children, he understood it now in his
own way.  To consent to a divorce, to give her her freedom, meant
in his thoughts to take from himself the last tie that bound him
to life--the children whom he loved; and to take from her the
last prop that stayed her on the path of right, to thrust her
down to her ruin.  If she were divorced, he knew she would join
her life to Vronsky's, and their tie would be an illegitimate and
criminal one, since a wife, by the interpretation of the
ecclesiastical law, could not marry while her husband was living.
"She will join him, and in a year or two he will throw her over,
or she will form a new tie," thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.  "And
I, by agreeing to an unlawful divorce, shall be to blame for her
ruin."  He had thought it all over hundreds of times, and was
convinced that a divorce was not at all simple, as Stepan
Arkadyevitch had said, but was utterly impossible.  He did not
believe a single word Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him; to every
word he had a thousand objections to make, but he listened to
him, feeling that his words were the expression of that mighty
brutal force which controlled his life and to which he would have
to submit.

"The only question is on what terms you agree to give her a
divorce.  She does not want anything, does not dare ask you for
anything, she leaves it all to your generosity."

"My God, my God! what for?" thought Alexey Alexandrovitch,
remembering the details of divorce proceedings in which the
husband took the blame on himself, and with just the same gesture
with which Vronsky had done the same, he hid his face for shame
in his hands.

"You are distressed, I understand that.  But if you think it
over..."

"Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the
other also; and if any man take away thy coat, let him have thy
cloak also," thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Yes, yes!" he cried in a shrill voice.  "I will take the
disgrace on myself, I will give up even my son, but...but
wouldn't it be better to let it alone?  Still you may do as you
like..."

And turning away so that his brother-in-law could not see him, he
sat down on a chair at the window.  There was bitterness, there
was shame in his heart, but with bitterness and shame he felt joy
and emotion at the height of his own meekness.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was touched.  He was silent for a space.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, believe me, she appreciates your
generosity," he said.  "But it seems it was the will of God," he
added, and as he said it felt how foolish a remark it was, and
with difficulty repressed a smile at his own foolishness.

Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made some reply, but tears
stopped him.

"This is an unhappy fatality, and one must accept it as such.  I
accept the calamity as an accomplished fact, and am doing my best
to help both her and you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

When he went out of his brother-in-law's room he was touched, but
that did not prevent him from being glad he had successfully
brought the matter to a conclusion, for he felt certain Alexey
Alexandrovitch would not go back on his words.  To this
satisfaction was added the fact that an idea had just struck him
for a riddle turning on his successful achievement, that when the
affair was over he would ask his wife and most intimate friends.
He put this riddle into two or three different ways.  "But I'll
work it out better than that," he said to himself with a smile.



Chapter 23


Vronsky's wound had been a dangerous one, though it did not
touch the heart, and for several days he had lain between life
and death.  The first time he was able to speak, Varya, his
brother's wife, was alone in the room.

"Varya," he said, looking sternly at her, "I shot myself by
accident.  And please never speak of it, and tell everyone so.
Or else it's too ridiculous."

Without answering his words, Varya bent over him, and with a
delighted smile gazed into his face.  His eyes were clear, not
feverish; but their expression was stern.

"Thank God!" she said.  "You're not in pain?"

"A little here."  He pointed to his breast.

"Then let me change your bandages."

In silence, stiffening his broad jaws, he looked at her while she
bandaged him up.  When she had finished he said:

"I'm not delirious.  Please manage that there may be no talk of
my having shot myself on purpose."

"No one does say so.  Only I hope you won't shoot yourself by
accident any more," she said, with a questioning smile.

"Of course I won't, but it would have been better..."

And he smiled gloomily.

In spite of these words and this smile, which so frightened
Varya, when the inflammation was over and he began to recover, he
felt that he was completely free from one part of his misery.  By
his action he had, as it were, washed away the shame and
humiliation he had felt before.  He could now think calmly of
Alexey Alexandrovitch.  He recognized all his magnanimity, but he
did not now feel himself humiliated by it.  Besides, he got back
again into the beaten track of his life.  He saw the possibility
of looking men in the face again without shame, and he could live
in accordance with his own habits.  One thing he could not pluck
out of his heart, though he never ceased struggling with it, was
the regret, amounting to despair, that he had lost her forever.
That now, having expiated his sin against the husband, he was
bound to renounce her, and never in future to stand between her
with her repentance and her husband, he had firmly decided in his
heart; but he could not tear out of his heart his regret at the
loss of her love, he could not erase from his memory those
moments of happiness that he had so little prized at the time,
and that haunted him in all their charm.

Serpuhovskoy had planned his appointment at Tashkend, and Vronsky
agreed to the proposition without the slightest hesitation.  But
the nearer the time of departure came, the bitterer was the
sacrifice he was making to what he thought his duty.

His wound had healed, and he was driving about making
preparations for his departure for Tashkend.

"To see her once and then to bury myself, to die," he thought,
and as he was paying farewell visits, he uttered this thought to
Betsy.  Charged with this commission, Betsy had gone to Anna, and
brought him back a negative reply.

"So much the better," thought Vronsky, when he received the news.
"It was a weakness, which would have shattered what strength I
have left."

Next day Betsy herself came to him in the morning, and announced
that she had heard through Oblonsky as a positive fact that
Alexey Alexandrovitch had agreed to a divorce, and that therefore
Vronsky could see Anna.

Without even troubling himself to see Betsy out of his flat,
forgetting all his resolutions, without asking when he could see
her, where her husband was, Vronsky drove straight to the
Karenins'.  He ran up the stairs seeing no one and nothing, and
with a rapid step, almost breaking into a run, he went into her
room.  And without considering, without noticing whether there
was anyone in the room or not, he flung his arms round her, and
began to cover her face, her hands, her neck with kisses.

Anna had been preparing herself for this meeting, had thought
what she would say to him, but she did not succeed in saying
anything of it; his passion mastered her.  She tried to calm him,
to calm herself, but it was too late.  His feeling infected her.
Her lips trembled so that for a long while she could say nothing.

"Yes, you have conquered me, and I am yours," she said at last,
pressing his hands to her bosom.

"So it had to be," he said.  "So long as we live, it must be so.
I know it now."

"That's true," she said, getting whiter and whiter, and embracing
his head.  "Still there is something terrible in it after all
that has happened."

"It will all pass, it will all pass; we shall be so happy.  Our
love, if it could be stronger, will be strengthened by there
being something terrible in it," he said, lifting his head and
parting his strong teeth in a smile.

And she could not but respond with a smile--not to his words, but
to the love in his eyes.  She took his hand and stroked her
chilled cheeks and cropped head with it.

"I don't know you with this short hair.  You've grown so pretty.
A boy.  But how pale you are!"

"Yes, I'm very weak," she said, smiling.  And her lips began
trembling again.

"We'll go to Italy; you will get strong," he said.

"Can it be possible we could be like husband and wife, alone,
your family with you?" she said, looking close into his eyes.

"It only seems strange to me that it can ever have been
otherwise."

"Stiva says that _he_ has agreed to everything, but I can't accept
_his_ generosity," she said, looking dreamily past Vronsky's face.
"I don't want a divorce; it's all the same to me now.  Only I
don't know what he will decide about Seryozha."

He could not conceive how at this moment of their meeting she
could remember and think of her son, of divorce.  What did it all
matter?

"Don't speak of that, don't think of it," he said, turning her
hand in his, and trying to draw her attention to him; but still
she did not look at him.

"Oh, why didn't I die! it would have been better," she said, and
silent tears flowed down both her cheeks; but she tried to smile,
so as not to wound him.

To decline the flattering and dangerous appointment at Tashkend
would have been, Vronsky had till then considered, disgraceful
and impossible.  But now, without an instant's consideration, he
declined it, and observing dissatisfaction in the most exalted
quarters at this step, he immediately retired from the army.

A month later Alexey Alexandrovitch was left alone with his son
in his house at Petersburg, while Anna and Vronsky had gone
abroad, not having obtained a divorce, but having absolutely
declined all idea of one.




PART 5



Chapter 1


Princess Shtcherbatskaya considered that it was out of the
question for the wedding to take place before Lent, just five
weeks off, since not half the trousseau could possibly be ready
by that time.  But she could not but agree with Levin that to fix
it for after Lent would be putting it off too late, as an old
aunt of Prince Shtcherbatsky's was seriously ill and might die,
and then the mourning would delay the wedding still longer.  And
therefore, deciding to divide the trousseau into two parts--a
larger and smaller trousseau--the princess consented to have the
wedding before Lent.  She determined that she would get the
smaller part of the trousseau all ready now, and the larger part
should be made later, and she was much vexed with Levin because
he was incapable of giving her a serious answer to the question
whether he agreed to this arrangement or not.  The arrangement
was the more suitable as, immediately after the wedding, the
young people were to go to the country, where the more important
part of the trousseau would not be wanted.

Levin still continued in the same delirious condition in which it
seemed to him that he and his happiness constituted the chief and
sole aim of all existence, and that he need not now think or care
about anything, that everything was being done and would be done
for him by others.  He had not even plans and aims for the
future, he left its arrangement to others, knowing that
everything would be delightful.  His brother Sergey Ivanovitch,
Stepan Arkadyevitch, and the princess guided him in doing what he
had to do.  All he did was to agree entirely with everything
suggested to him.  His brother raised money for him, the princess
advised him to leave Moscow after the wedding.  Stepan
Arkadyevitch advised him to go abroad.  He agreed to everything.
"Do what you choose, if it amuses you.  I'm happy, and my
happiness can be no greater and no less for anything you do," he
thought.  When he told Kitty of Stepan Arkadyevitch's advice that
they should go abroad, he was much surprised that she did not
agree to this, and had some definite requirements of her own in
regard to their future.  She knew Levin had work he loved in the
country.  She did not, as he saw, understand this work, she did
not even care to understand it.  But that did not prevent her
from regarding it as a matter of great importance.  And then she
knew their home would be in the country, and she wanted to go,
not abroad where she was not going to live, but to the place
where their home would be.  This definitely expressed purpose
astonished Levin.  But since he did not care either way, he
immediately asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though it were his
duty, to go down to the country and to arrange everything there
to the best of his ability with the taste of which he had so
much.

"But I say," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him one day after he had
come back from the country, where he had got everything ready for
the young people's arrival, "have you a certificate of having
been at confession?"

"No.  But what of it?"

"You can't be married without it."

"_Aïe, aïe, aïe!_" cried Levin.  "Why, I believe it's nine years
since I've taken the sacrament!  I never thought of it."

"You're a pretty fellow!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch laughing, "and
you call me a Nihilist!  But this won't do, you know.  You must
take the sacrament."

"When?  There are four days left now."

Stepan Arkadyevitch arranged this also, and Levin had to go to
confession.  To Levin, as to any unbeliever who respects the
beliefs of others, it was exceedingly disagreeable to be present
at and take part in church ceremonies.  At this moment, in his
present softened state of feeling, sensitive to everything, this
inevitable act of hypocrisy was not merely painful to Levin, it
seemed to him utterly impossible.  Now, in the heyday of his
highest glory, his fullest flower, he would have to be a liar or
a scoffer.  He felt incapable of being either.  But though he
repeatedly plied Stepan Arkadyevitch with questions as to the
possibility of obtaining a certificate without actually
communicating, Stepan Arkadyevitch maintained that it was out of
the question.

"Besides, what is it to you--two days?  And he's an awfully nice
clever old fellow.  He'll pull the tooth out for you so gently,
you won't notice it."

Standing at the first litany, Levin attempted to revive in
himself his youthful recollections of the intense religious
emotion he had passed through between the ages of sixteen and
seventeen.

But he was at once convinced that it was utterly impossible to
him.  He attempted to look at it all as an empty custom, having
no sort of meaning, like the custom of paying calls.  But he felt
that he could not do that either.  Levin found himself, like the
majority of his contemporaries, in the vaguest position in regard
to religion.  Believe he could not, and at the same time he had
no firm conviction that it was all wrong.  And consequently, not
being able to believe in the significance of what he was doing
nor to regard it with indifference as an empty formality, during
the whole period of preparing for the sacrament he was conscious
of a feeling of discomfort and shame at doing what he did not
himself understand, and what, as an inner voice told him, was
therefore false and wrong.

During the service he would first listen to the prayers, trying
to attach some meaning to them not discordant with his own views;
then feeling that he could not understand and must condemn them,
he tried not to listen to them, but to attend to the thoughts,
observations, and memories which floated through his brain with
extreme vividness during this idle time of standing in church.

He had stood through the litany, the evening service and the
midnight service, and the next day he got up earlier than usual,
and without having tea went at eight o'clock in the morning to
the church for the morning service and the confession.

There was no one in the church but a beggar soldier, two old
women, and the church officials.  A young deacon, whose long back
showed in two distinct halves through his thin undercassock, met
him, and at once going to a little table at the wall read the
exhortation.  During the reading, especially at the frequent and
rapid repetition of the same words, "Lord, have mercy on us!"
which resounded with an echo, Levin felt that thought was shut
and sealed up, and that it must not be touched or stirred now or
confusion would be the result; and so standing behind the deacon
he went on thinking of his own affairs, neither listening nor
examining what was said.  "It's wonderful what expression there
is in her hand," he thought, remembering how they had been
sitting the day before at a corner table.  They had nothing to
talk about, as was almost always the case at this time, and
laying her hand on the table she kept opening and shutting it,
and laughed herself as she watched her action.  He remembered how
he had kissed it and then had examined the lines on the pink
palm.  "Have mercy on us again!" thought Levin, crossing himself,
bowing, and looking at the supple spring of the deacon's back
bowing before him.  "She took my hand then and examined the lines
'You've got a splendid hand,' she said." And he looked at his own
hand and the short hand of the deacon.  "Yes, now it will soon be
over," he thought.  "No, it seems to be beginning again," he
thought, listening to the prayers.  "No, it's just ending: there
he is bowing down to the ground.  That's always at the end."

The deacon's hand in a plush cuff accepted a three-rouble note
unobtrusively, and the deacon said he would put it down in the
register, and his new boots creaking jauntily over the flagstones
of the empty church, he went to the altar.  A moment later he
peeped out thence and beckoned to Levin.  Thought, till then
locked up, began to stir in Levin's head, but he made haste to
drive it away.  "It will come right somehow," he thought, and
went towards the altar-rails.  He went up the steps, and turning
to the right saw the priest.  The priest, a little old man with a
scanty grizzled beard and weary, good-natured eyes, was standing
at the altar-rails, turning over the pages of a missal.  With a
slight bow to Levin he began immediately reading prayers in the
official voice.  When he had finished them he bowed down to the
ground and turned, facing Levin.

"Christ is present here unseen, receiving your confession," he
said, pointing to the crucifix.  "Do you believe in all the
doctrines of the Holy Apostolic Church?" the priest went on,
turning his eyes away from Levin's face and folding his hands
under his stole.

"I have doubted, I doubt everything," said Levin in a voice that
jarred on himself, and he ceased speaking.

The priest waited a few seconds to see if he would not say more,
and closing his eyes he said quickly, with a broad, Vladimirsky
accent:

"Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind, but we must pray
that God in His mercy will strengthen us.  What are your special
sins?" he added, without the slightest interval, as though
anxious not to waste time.

"My chief sin is doubt.  I have doubts of everything, and for the
most part I am in doubt."

"Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind," the priest
repeated the same words.  "What do you doubt about principally?"

"I doubt of everything.  I sometimes even have doubts of the
existence of God," Levin could not help saying, and he was
horrified at the impropriety of what he was saying.  But Levin's
words did not, it seemed, make much impression on the priest.

"What sort of doubt can there be of the existence of God?" he
said hurriedly, with a just perceptible smile.

Levin did not speak.

"What doubt can you have of the Creator when you behold His
creation?" the priest went on in the rapid customary jargon.
"Who has decked the heavenly firmament with its lights?  Who has
clothed the earth in its beauty?  How explain it without the
Creator?" he said, looking inquiringly at Levin.

Levin felt that it would be improper to enter upon a metaphysical
discussion with the priest, and so he said in reply merely what
was a direct answer to the question.

"I don't know," he said.

"You don't know!  Then how can you doubt that God created all?"
the priest said, with good-humored perplexity.

"I don't understand it at all," said Levin, blushing, and feeling
that his words were stupid, and that they could not be anything
but stupid in such a position.

"Pray to God and beseech Him.  Even the holy fathers had doubts,
and prayed to God to strengthen their faith.  The devil has great
power, and we must resist him.  Pray to God, beseech Him.  Pray
to God," he repeated hurriedly.

The priest paused for some time, as though meditating.

"You're about, I hear, to marry the daughter of my parishioner
and son in the spirit, Prince Shtcherbatsky?" he resumed, with a
smile.  "An excellent young lady."

"Yes," answered Levin, blushing for the priest.  "What does he
want to ask me about this at confession for?" he thought.

And, as though answering his thought, the priest said to him:

"You are about to enter into holy matrimony, and God may bless
you with offspring.  Well, what sort of bringing-up can you give
your babes if you do not overcome the temptation of the devil,
enticing you to infidelity?" he said, with gentle
reproachfulness.  "If you love your child as a good father, you
will not desire only wealth, luxury, honor for your infant; you
will be anxious for his salvation, his spiritual enlightenment
with the light of truth.  Eh?  What answer will you make him when
the innocent babe asks you: 'Papa! who made all that enchants me
in this world--the earth, the waters, the sun, the flowers, the
grass?'  Can you say to him: 'I don't know'? You cannot but know,
since the Lord God in His infinite mercy has revealed it to us.
Or your child will ask you: 'What awaits me in the life beyond
the tomb?'  What will you say to him when you know nothing?  How
will you answer him?  Will you leave him to the allurements of
the world and the devil?  That's not right," he said, and he
stopped, putting his head on one side and looking at Levin with
his kindly, gentle eyes.

Levin made no answer this time, not because he did not want to
enter upon a discussion with the priest, but because, so far, no
one had ever asked him such questions, and when his babes did ask
him those questions, it would be time enough to think about
answering them.

"You are entering upon a time of life," pursued the priest, "when
you must choose your path and keep to it.  Pray to God that He
may in His mercy aid you and have mercy on you!" he concluded.
"Our Lord and God, Jesus Christ, in the abundance and riches of
His lovingkindness, forgives this child..." and, finishing the
prayer of absolution, the priest blessed him and dismissed him.

On getting home that day, Levin had a delightful sense of relief
at the awkward position being over and having been got through
without his having to tell a lie.  Apart from this, there
remained a vague memory that what the kind, nice old fellow had
said had not been at all so stupid as he had fancied at first,
and that there was something in it that must be cleared up.

"Of course, not now," thought Levin, "but some day later on."
Levin felt more than ever now that there was something not clear
and not clean in his soul, and that, in regard to religion, he
was in the same position which he perceived so clearly and
disliked in others, and for which he blamed his friend Sviazhsky.

Levin spent that evening with his betrothed at Dolly's, and was
in very high spirits.  To explain to Stepan Arkadyevitch the
state of excitement in which he found himself, he said that he
was happy like a dog being trained to jump through a hoop, who,
having at last caught the idea, and done what was required of
him, whines and wags its tail, and jumps up to the table and the
windows in its delight.



Chapter 2


On the day of the wedding, according to the Russian custom (the
princess and Darya Alexandrovna insisted on strictly keeping all
the customs), Levin did not see his betrothed, and dined at his
hotel with three bachelor friends, casually brought together at
his rooms.  These were Sergey Ivanovitch, Katavasov, a university
friend, now professor of natural science, whom Levin had met in
the street and insisted on taking home with him, and Tchirikov,
his best man, a Moscow conciliation-board judge, Levin's
companion in his bear-hunts.  The dinner was a very merry one:
Sergey Ivanovitch was in his happiest mood, and was much amused
by Katavasov's originality.  Katavasov, feeling his originality
was appreciated and understood, made the most of it.  Tchirikov
always gave a lively and good-humored support to conversation of
any sort.

"See, now," said Katavasov, drawling his words from a habit
acquired in the lecture-room, "what a capable fellow was our
friend Konstantin Dmitrievitch.  I'm not speaking of present
company, for he's absent.  At the time he left the university he
was fond of science, took an interest in humanity; now one-half
of his abilities is devoted to deceiving himself, and the other
to justifying the deceit."

"A more determined enemy of matrimony than you I never saw," said
Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Oh, no, I'm not an enemy of matrimony.  I'm in favor of division
of labor.  People who can do nothing else ought to rear people
while the rest work for their happiness and enlightenment.
That's how I look at it.  To muddle up two trades is the error of
the amateur; I'm not one of their number."

"How happy I shall be when I hear that you're in love!" said
Levin.  "Please invite me to the wedding."

"I'm in love now."

"Yes, with a cuttlefish!  You know," Levin turned to his brother,
"Mihail Semyonovitch is writing a work on the digestive organs of
the..."

"Now, make a muddle of it!  It doesn't matter what about.  And
the fact is, I certainly do love cuttlefish."

"But that's no hindrance to your loving your wife."

"The cuttlefish is no hindrance.  The wife is the hindrance."

"Why so?"

"Oh, you'll see!  You care about farming, hunting,--well, you'd
better look out!"

"Arhip was here today; he said there were a lot of elks in
Prudno, and two bears," said Tchirikov.

"Well, you must go and get them without me."

"Ah, that's the truth," said Sergey Ivanovitch.  "And you may say
good-bye to bear-hunting for the future--your wife won't allow
it!"

Levin smiled.  The picture of his wife not letting him go was so
pleasant that he was ready to renounce the delights of looking
upon bears forever.

"Still, it's a pity they should get those two bears without you.
Do you remember last time at Hapilovo? That was a delightful
hunt!" said Tchirikov.

Levin had not the heart to disillusion him of the notion that
there could be something delightful apart from her, and so said
nothing.

"There's some sense in this custom of saying good-bye to bachelor
life," said Sergey Ivanovitch.  "However happy you may be, you
must regret your freedom."

"And confess there is a feeling that you want to jump out of the
window, like Gogol's bridegroom?"

"Of course there is, but it isn't confessed," said Katavasov, and
he broke into loud laughter.

"Oh, well, the window's open.  Let's start off this instant to
Tver!  There's a big she-bear; one can go right up to the lair.
Seriously, let's go by the five o'clock!  And here let them do
what they like," said Tchirikov, smiling.

"Well, now, on my honor," said Levin, smiling, "I can't find in
my heart that feeling of regret for my freedom."

"Yes, there's such a chaos in your heart just now that you can't
find anything there," said Katavasov.  "Wait a bit, when you set
it to rights a little, you'll find it!"

"No; if so, I should have felt a little, apart from my feeling"
(he could not say love before them) "and happiness, a certain
regret at losing my freedom....  On the contrary, I am glad at
the very loss of my freedom."

"Awful! It's a hopeless case!" said Katavasov.  "Well, let's
drink to his recovery, or wish that a hundredth part of his
dreams may be realized--and that would be happiness such as never
has been seen on earth!"

Soon after dinner the guests went away to be in time to be
dressed for the wedding.

When he was left alone, and recalled the conversation of these
bachelor friends, Levin asked himself: had he in his heart that
regret for his freedom of which they had spoken?  He smiled at
the question.  "Freedom!  What is freedom for?  Happiness is only
in loving and wishing her wishes, thinking her thoughts, that is
to say, not freedom at all--that's happiness!"

"But do I know her ideas, her wishes, her feelings?" some voice
suddenly whispered to him.  The smile died away from his face,
and he grew thoughtful.  And suddenly a strange feeling came upon
him.  There came over him a dread and doubt--doubt of everything.

"What if she does not love me?  What if she's marrying me simply
to be married?  What if she doesn't see herself what she's
doing?" he asked himself.  "She may come to her senses, and only
when she is being married realize that she does not and cannot
love me."  And strange, most evil thoughts of her began to come
to him.  He was jealous of Vronsky, as he had been a year ago, as
though the evening he had seen her with Vronsky had been
yesterday.  He suspected she had not told him everything.

He jumped up quickly.  "No, this can't go on!" he said to himself
in despair.  "I'll go to her; I'll ask her; I'll say for the last
time: we are free, and hadn't we better stay so?  Anything's
better than endless misery, disgrace, unfaithfulness!" With
despair in his heart and bitter anger against all men, against
himself, against her, he went out of the hotel and drove to her
house.

He found her in one of the back rooms.  She was sitting on a
chest and making some arrangements with her maid, sorting over
heaps of dresses of different colors, spread on the backs of
chairs and on the floor.

"Ah!" she cried, seeing him, and beaming with delight.  "Kostya!
Konstantin Dmitrievitch!" (These latter days she used these names
almost alternately.) "I didn't expect you! I'm going through my
wardrobe to see what's for whom..."

"Oh! that's very nice!" he said gloomily, looking at the maid.

"You can go, Dunyasha, I'll call you presently," said Kitty.
"Kostya, what's the matter?" she asked, definitely adopting this
familiar name as soon as the maid had gone out.  She noticed his
strange face, agitated and gloomy, and a panic came over her.

"Kitty! I'm in torture.  I can't suffer alone," he said with
despair in his voice, standing before her and looking imploringly
into her eyes.  He saw already from her loving, truthful face,
that nothing could come of what he had meant to say, but yet he
wanted her to reassure him herself.  "I've come to say that
there's still time.  This can all be stopped and set right."

"What?  I don't understand.  What is the matter?"

"What I have said a thousand times over, and can't help thinking
...that I'm not worthy of you.  You couldn't consent to marry
me.  Think a little.  You've made a mistake.  Think it over
thoroughly.  You can't love me....  If...better say so," he said,
not looking at her.  "I shall be wretched.  Let people say what
they like; anything's better than misery....  Far better now
while there's still time...."

"I don't understand," she answered, panic-stricken; "you mean you
want to give it up...don't want it?"

"Yes, if you don't love me."

"You're out of your mind!" she cried, turning crimson with
vexation.  But his face was so piteous, that she restrained her
vexation, and flinging some clothes off an arm-chair, she sat
down beside him.  "What are you thinking? tell me all."

"I am thinking you can't love me.  What can you love me for?"

"My God! what can I do?..." she said, and burst into tears.

"Oh! what have I done?" he cried, and kneeling before her, he
fell to kissing her hands.

When the princess came into the room five minutes later, she
found them completely reconciled.  Kitty had not simply assured
him that she loved him, but had gone so far--in answer to his
question, what she loved him for--as to explain what for.  She
told him that she loved him because she understood him
completely, because she knew what he would like, and because
everything he liked was good.  And this seemed to him perfectly
clear.  When the princess came to them, they were sitting side by
side on the chest, sorting the dresses and disputing over Kitty's
wanting to give Dunyasha the brown dress she had been wearing
when Levin proposed to her, while he insisted that that dress
must never be given away, but Dunyasha must have the blue one.

"How is it you don't see?  She's a brunette, and it won't suit
her....  I've worked it all out."

Hearing why he had come, the princess was half humorously, half
seriously angry with him, and sent him home to dress and not to
hinder Kitty's hair-dressing, as Charles the hair-dresser was
just coming.

"As it is, she's been eating nothing lately and is losing her
looks, and then you must come and upset her with your nonsense,"
she said to him.  "Get along with you, my dear!"

Levin, guilty and shamefaced, but pacified, went back to his
hotel.  His brother, Darya Alexandrovna, and Stepan Arkadyevitch,
all in full dress, were waiting for him to bless him with the
holy picture.  There was no time to lose.  Darya Alexandrovna had
to drive home again to fetch her curled and pomaded son, who was
to carry the holy pictures after the bride.  Then a carriage had
to be sent for the best man, and another that would take Sergey
Ivanovitch away would have to be sent back....  Altogether
there were a great many most complicated matters to be considered
and arranged.  One thing was unmistakable, that there must be no
delay, as it was already half-past six.

Nothing special happened at the ceremony of benediction with the
holy picture.  Stepan Arkadyevitch stood in a comically solemn
pose beside his wife, took the holy picture, and telling Levin
to bow down to the ground, he blessed him with his kindly,
ironical smile, and kissed him three times; Darya Alexandrovna
did the same, and immediately was in a hurry to get off, and
again plunged into the intricate question of the destinations of
the various carriages.

"Come, I'll tell you how we'll manage: you drive in our carriage
to fetch him, and Sergey Ivanovitch, if he'll be so good, will
drive there and then send his carriage."

"Of course; I shall be delighted."

"We'll come on directly with him.  Are your things sent off?"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Yes," answered Levin, and he told Kouzma to put out his clothes
for him to dress.



Chapter 3


A crowd of people, principally women, was thronging round the
church lighted up for the wedding.  Those who had not succeeded
in getting into the main entrance were crowding about the
windows, pushing, wrangling, and peeping through the gratings.

More than twenty carriages had already been drawn up in ranks
along the street by the police.  A police officer, regardless of
the frost, stood at the entrance, gorgeous in his uniform.  More
carriages were continually driving up, and ladies wearing flowers
and carrying their trains, and men taking off their helmets or
black hats kept walking into the church.  Inside the church both
lusters were already lighted, and all the candles before the holy
pictures.  The gilt on the red ground of the holy picture-stand,
and the gilt relief on the pictures, and the silver of the
lusters and candlesticks, and the stones of the floor, and the
rugs, and the banners above in the choir, and the steps of the
altar, and the old blackened books, and the cassocks and
surplices--all were flooded with light.  On the right side of the
warm church, in the crowd of frock coats and white ties, uniforms
and broadcloth, velvet, satin, hair and flowers, bare shoulders
and arms and long gloves, there was discreet but lively
conversation that echoed strangely in the high cupola.  Every
time there was heard the creak of the opened door the
conversation in the crowd died away, and everybody looked round
expecting to see the bride and bridegroom come in.  But the door
had opened more than ten times, and each time it was either a
belated guest or guests, who joined the circle of the invited on
the right, or a spectator, who had eluded or softened the police
officer, and went to join the crowd of outsiders on the left.
Both the guests and the outside public had by now passed through
all the phases of anticipation.

At first they imagined that the bride and bridegroom would arrive
immediately, and attached no importance at all to their being
late.  Then they began to look more and more often towards the
door, and to talk of whether anything could have happened.  Then
the long delay began to be positively discomforting, and
relations and guests tried to look as if they were not thinking
of the bridegroom but were engrossed in conversation.

The head deacon, as though to remind them of the value of his
time, coughed impatiently, making the window-panes quiver in
their frames.  In the choir the bored choristers could be heard
trying their voices and blowing their noses.  The priest was
continually sending first the beadle and then the deacon to find
out whether the bridegroom had not come, more and more often he
went himself, in a lilac vestment and an embroidered sash, to the
side door, expecting to see the bridegroom.  At last one of the
ladies, glancing at her watch, said, "It really is strange,
though!" and all the guests became uneasy and began loudly
expressing their wonder and dissatisfaction.  One of the
bridegroom's best men went to find out what had happened.  Kitty
meanwhile had long ago been quite ready, and in her white dress
and long veil and wreath of orange blossoms she was standing in
the drawing-room of the Shtcherbatskys' house with her sister,
Madame Lvova, who was her bridal-mother.  She was looking out of
the window, and had been for over half an hour anxiously
expecting to hear from the best man that her bridegroom was at
the church.

Levin meanwhile, in his trousers, but without his coat and
waistcoat, was walking to and fro in his room at the hotel,
continually putting his head out of the door and looking up and
down the corridor.  But in the corridor there was no sign of the
person he was looking for and he came back in despair, and
frantically waving his hands addressed Stepan Arkadyevitch, who
was smoking serenely.

"Was ever a man in such a fearful fool's position?" he said.

"Yes, it is stupid," Stepan Arkadyevitch assented, smiling
soothingly.  "But don't worry, it'll be brought directly."

"No, what is to be done!" said Levin, with smothered fury.  "And
these fools of open waistcoats!  Out of the question!" he said,
looking at the crumpled front of his shirt.  "And what if the
things have been taken on to the railway station!" he roared in
desperation.

"Then you must put on mine."

"I ought to have done so long ago, if at all."

"It's not nice to look ridiculous....  Wait a bit! it will
_come round_."

The point was that when Levin asked for his evening suit, Kouzma,
his old servant, had brought him the coat, waistcoat, and
everything that was wanted.

"But the shirt!" cried Levin.

"You've got a shirt on," Kouzma answered, with a placid smile.

Kouzma had not thought of leaving out a clean shirt, and on
receiving instructions to pack up everything and send it round to
the Shtcherbatskys' house, from which the young people were to
set out the same evening, he had done so, packing everything but
the dress suit.  The shirt worn since the morning was crumpled
and out of the question with the fashionable open waistcoat.  It
was a long way to send to the Shtcherbatskys'.  They sent out to
buy a shirt.  The servant came back; everything was shut up--it
was Sunday.  They sent to Stepan Arkadyevitch's and brought a
shirt--it was impossibly wide and short.  They sent finally to
the Shtcherbatskys' to unpack the things.  The bridegroom was
expected at the church while he was pacing up and down his room
like a wild beast in a cage, peeping out into the corridor, and
with horror and despair recalling what absurd things he had said
to Kitty and what she might be thinking now.

At last the guilty Kouzma flew panting into the room with the
shirt.

"Only just in time.  They were just lifting it into the van,"
said Kouzma.

Three minutes later Levin ran full speed into the corridor, not
looking at his watch for fear of aggravating his sufferings.

"You won't help matters like this," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with
a smile, hurrying with more deliberation after him.  "It will
come round, it will come round...I tell you."



Chapter 4


"They've come!"  "Here he is!"  "Which one?"  "Rather young, eh?"
"Why, my dear soul, she looks more dead than alive!" were the
comments in the crowd, when Levin, meeting his bride in the
entrance, walked with her into the church.

Stepan Arkadyevitch told his wife the cause of the delay, and the
guests were whispering it with smiles to one another.  Levin saw
nothing and no one; he did not take his eyes off his bride.

Everyone said she had lost her looks dreadfully of late, and was
not nearly so pretty on her wedding day as usual; but Levin did
not think so.  He looked at her hair done up high, with the long
white veil and white flowers and the high, stand-up, scalloped
collar, that in such a maidenly fashion hid her long neck at the
sides and only showed it in front, her strikingly slender figure,
and it seemed to him that she looked better than ever--not
because these flowers, this veil, this gown from Paris added
anything to her beauty; but because, in spite of the elaborate
sumptuousness of her attire, the expression of her sweet face, of
her eyes, of her lips was still her own characteristic expression
of guileless truthfulness.

"I was beginning to think you meant to run away," she said, and
smiled to him.

"It's so stupid, what happened to me, I'm ashamed to speak of
it!" he said, reddening, and he was obliged to turn to Sergey
Ivanovitch, who came up to him.

"This is a pretty story of yours about the shirt!" said Sergey
Ivanovitch, shaking his head and smiling.

"Yes, yes!" answered Levin, without an idea of what they were
talking about.

"Now, Kostya, you have to decide," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with
an air of mock dismay, "a weighty question.  You are at this
moment just in the humor to appreciate all its gravity.  They ask
me, are they to light the candles that have been lighted before
or candles that have never been lighted? It's a matter of ten
roubles," he added, relaxing his lips into a smile.  "I have
decided, but I was afraid you might not agree."

Levin saw it was a joke, but he could not smile.

"Well, how's it to be then?--unlighted or lighted candles? that's
the question."

"Yes, yes, unlighted."

"Oh, I'm very glad.  The question's decided!" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling.  "How silly men are, though, in this
position," he said to Tchirikov, when Levin, after looking
absently at him, had moved back to his bride.

"Kitty, mind you're the first to step on the carpet," said
Countess Nordston, coming up.  "You're a nice person!" she said
to Levin.

"Aren't you frightened, eh?" said Marya Dmitrievna, an old aunt.

"Are you cold?  You're pale.  Stop a minute, stoop down," said
Kitty's sister, Madame Lvova, and with her plump, handsome arms
she smilingly set straight the flowers on her head.

Dolly came up, tried to say something, but could not speak,
cried, and then laughed unnaturally.

Kitty looked at all of them with the same absent eyes as Levin.

Meanwhile the officiating clergy had got into their vestments,
and the priest and deacon came out to the lectern, which stood in
the forepart of the church.  The priest turned to Levin saying
something.  Levin did not hear what the priest said.

"Take the bride's hand and lead her up," the best man said to
Levin.

It was a long while before Levin could make out what was expected
of him.  For a long time they tried to set him right and made him
begin again--because he kept taking Kitty by the wrong arm or
with the wrong arm--till he understood at last that what he had
to do was, without changing his position, to take her right hand
in his right hand.  When at last he had taken the bride's hand in
the correct way, the priest walked a few paces in front of them
and stopped at the lectern.  The crowd of friends and relations
moved after them, with a buzz of talk and a rustle of skirts.
Someone stooped down and pulled out the bride's train.  The
church became so still that the drops of wax could be heard
falling from the candles.

The little old priest in his ecclesiastical cap, with his long
silvery-gray locks of hair parted behind his ears, was fumbling
with something at the lectern, putting out his little old hands
from under the heavy silver vestment with the gold cross on the
back of it.

Stepan Arkadyevitch approached him cautiously, whispered
something, and making a sign to Levin, walked back again.

The priest lighted two candles, wreathed with flowers, and
holding them sideways so that the wax dropped slowly from them he
turned, facing the bridal pair.  The priest was the same old man
that had confessed Levin.  He looked with weary and melancholy
eyes at the bride and bridegroom, sighed, and putting his right
hand out from his vestment, blessed the bridegroom with it, and
also with a shade of solicitous tenderness laid the crossed
fingers on the bowed head of Kitty.  Then he gave them the
candles, and taking the censer, moved slowly away from them.

"Can it be true?" thought Levin, and he looked round at his
bride.  Looking down at her he saw her face in profile, and from
the scarcely perceptible quiver of her lips and eyelashes he knew
she was aware of his eyes upon her.  She did not look round, but
the high scalloped collar, that reached her little pink ear,
trembled faintly.  He saw that a sigh was held back in her
throat, and the little hand in the long glove shook as it held
the candle.

All the fuss of the shirt, of being late, all the talk of friends
and relations, their annoyance, his ludicrous position--all
suddenly passed away and he was filled with joy and dread.

The handsome, stately head-deacon wearing a silver robe and his
curly locks standing out at each side of his head, stepped
smartly forward, and lifting his stole on two fingers, stood
opposite the priest.

"Blessed be the name of the Lord," the solemn syllables rang out
slowly one after another, setting the air quivering with waves of
sound.

"Blessed is the name of our God, from the beginning, is now, and
ever shall be," the little old priest answered in a submissive,
piping voice, still fingering something at the lectern.  And the
full chorus of the unseen choir rose up, filling the whole
church, from the windows to the vaulted roof, with broad waves of
melody.  It grew stronger, rested for an instant, and slowly died
away.

They prayed, as they always do, for peace from on high and for
salvation, for the Holy Synod, and for the Tsar; they prayed,
too, for the servants of God, Konstantin and Ekaterina, now
plighting their troth.

"Vouchsafe to them love made perfect, peace and help, O Lord, we
beseech Thee," the whole church seemed to breathe with the voice
of the head deacon.

Levin heard the words, and they impressed him.  "How did they
guess that it is help, just help that one wants?" he thought,
recalling all his fears and doubts of late.  "What do I know?
what can I do in this fearful business," he thought, "without
help?  Yes, it is help I want now."

When the deacon had finished the prayer for the Imperial family,
the priest turned to the bridal pair with a book: "Eternal God,
that joinest together in love them that were separate," he read
in a gentle, piping voice: "who hast ordained the union of holy
wedlock that cannot be set asunder, Thou who didst bless Isaac
and Rebecca and their descendants, according to Thy Holy
Covenant; bless Thy servants, Konstantin and Ekaterina, leading
them in the path of all good works.  For gracious and merciful
art Thou, our Lord, and glory be to Thee, the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, now and ever shall be."

"Amen!" the unseen choir sent rolling again upon the air.

"'Joinest together in love them that were separate.' What deep
meaning in those words, and how they correspond with what one
feels at this moment," thought Levin.  "Is she feeling the same
as I?"

And looking round, he met her eyes, and from their expression he
concluded that she was understanding it just as he was.  But this
was a mistake; she almost completely missed the meaning of the
words of the service; she had not heard them, in fact.  She could
not listen to them and take them in, so strong was the one
feeling that filled her breast and grew stronger and stronger.
That feeling was joy at the completion of the process that for
the last month and a half had been going on in her soul, and had
during those six weeks been a joy and a torture to her.  On the
day when in the drawing room of the house in Arbaty Street she
had gone up to him in her brown dress, and given herself to him
without a word--on that day, at that hour, there took place in
her heart a complete severance from all her old life, and a quite
different, new, utterly strange life had begun for her, while the
old life was actually going on as before.  Those six weeks had
for her been a time of the utmost bliss and the utmost misery.
All her life, all her desires and hopes were concentrated on this
one man, still uncomprehended by her, to whom she was bound by a
feeling of alternate attraction and repulsion, even less
comprehended than the man himself, and all the while she was
going on living in the outward conditions of her old life.
Living the old life, she was horrified at herself, at her utter
insurmountable callousness to all her own past, to things, to
habits, to the people she had loved, who loved her--to her
mother, who was wounded by her indifference, to her kind, tender
father, till then dearer than all the world.  At one moment she
was horrified at this indifference, at another she rejoiced at
what had brought her to this indifference.  She could not frame a
thought, not a wish apart from life with this man; but this new
life was not yet, and she could not even picture it clearly to
herself.  There was only anticipation, the dread and joy of the
new and the unknown.  And now behold--anticipation and
uncertainty and remorse at the abandonment of the old life--all
was ending, and the new was beginning.  This new life could not
but have terrors for her inexperience; but, terrible or not, the
change had been wrought six weeks before in her soul, and this
was merely the final sanction of what had long been completed in
her heart.

Turning again to the lectern, the priest with some difficulty
took Kitty's little ring, and asking Levin for his hand, put it
on the first joint of his finger.  "The servant of God,
Konstantin, plights his troth to the servant of God, Ekaterina."
And putting his big ring on Kitty's touchingly weak, pink little
finger, the priest said the same thing.

And the bridal pair tried several times to understand what they
had to do, and each time made some mistake and were corrected by
the priest in a whisper.  At last, having duly performed the
ceremony, having signed the rings with the cross, the priest
handed Kitty the big ring, and Levin the little one.  Again they
were puzzled, and passed the rings from hand to hand, still
without doing what was expected.

Dolly, Tchirikov, and Stepan Arkadyevitch stepped forward to set
them right.  There was an interval of hesitation, whispering, and
smiles; but the expression of solemn emotion on the faces of the
betrothed pair did not change: on the contrary, in their
perplexity over their hands they looked more grave and deeply
moved than before, and the smile with which Stepan Arkadyevitch
whispered to them that now they would each put on their own ring
died away on his lips.  He had a feeling that any smile would jar
on them.

"Thou who didst from the beginning create male and female," the
priest read after the exchange of rings, "from Thee woman was
given to man to be a helpmeet to him, and for the procreation of
children.  O Lord, our God, who hast poured down the blessings of
Thy Truth according to Thy Holy Covenant upon Thy chosen
servants, our fathers, from generation to generation, bless Thy
servants Konstantin and Ekaterina, and make their troth fast in
faith, and union of hearts, and truth, and love...."

Levin felt more and more that all his ideas of marriage, all his
dreams of how he would order his life, were mere childishness,
and that it was something he had not understood hitherto, and now
understood less than ever, though it was being performed upon
him.  The lump in his throat rose higher and higher, tears that
would not be checked came into his eyes.



Chapter 5


In the church there was all  Moscow, all the friends and
relations; and  during the ceremony of plighting troth, in the
brilliantly lighted church, there was an incessant flow of
discreetly subdued talk in the circle of gaily dressed women and
girls, and men in white ties, frockcoats, and uniforms.  The talk
was principally kept up by the men, while the women were absorbed
in watching every detail of the ceremony, which always means so
much to them.

In the little group nearest to the bride were her two sisters:
Dolly, and the other one, the self-possessed beauty, Madame
Lvova, who had just arrived from abroad.

"Why is it Marie's in lilac, as bad as black, at a wedding?" said
Madame Korsunskaya.

"With her complexion, it's the one salvation," responded Madame
Trubetskaya.  "I wonder why they had the wedding in the evening?
It's like shop-people..."

"So much prettier.  I was married in the evening too..." answered
Madame Korsunskaya, and she sighed, remembering how charming she
had been that day, and how absurdly in love her husband was, and
how different it all was now.

"They say if anyone's best man more than ten times, he'll never
be married.  I wanted to be for the tenth time, but the post was
taken," said Count Siniavin to the pretty Princess Tcharskaya,
who had designs on him.

Princess Tcharskaya only answered with a smile.  She looked at
Kitty, thinking how and when she would stand with Count Siniavin
in Kitty's place, and how she would remind him then of his joke
today.

Shtcherbatsky told the old maid of honor, Madame Nikolaeva, that
he meant to put the crown on Kitty's chignon for luck.

"She ought not to have worn a chignon," answered Madame
Nikolaeva, who had long ago made up her mind that if the elderly
widower she was angling for married her, the wedding should be of
the simplest.  "I don't like such grandeur."

Sergey Ivanovitch was talking to Darya Dmitrievna, jestingly
assuring her that the custom of going away after the wedding was
becoming common because newly married people always felt a little
ashamed of themselves.

"Your brother may feel proud of himself.  She's a marvel of
sweetness.  I believe you're envious."

"Oh, I've got over that, Darya Dmitrievna," he answered, and a
melancholy and serious expression suddenly came over his face.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was telling his sister-in-law his joke about
divorce.

"The wreath wants setting straight," she answered, not hearing
him.

"What a pity she's lost her looks so," Countess Nordston said to
Madame Lvova.  "Still he's not worth her little finger, is he?"

"Oh, I like him so--not because he's my future _beau-frère_,"
answered Madame Lvova.  "And how well he's behaving!  It's so
difficult, too, to look well in such a position, not to be
ridiculous.  And he's not ridiculous, and not affected; one can
see he's moved."

"You expected it, I suppose?"

"Almost.  She always cared for him."

"Well, we shall see which of them will step on the rug first.  I
warned Kitty."

"It will make no difference," said Madame Lvova; "we're all
obedient wives; it's in our family."

"Oh, I stepped on the rug before Vassily on purpose.  And you,
Dolly?"

Dolly stood beside them; she heard them, but she did not answer.
She was deeply moved.  The tears stood in her eyes, and she could
not have spoken without crying.  She was rejoicing over Kitty and
Levin; going back in thought to her own wedding, she glanced at
the radiant figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgot all the
present, and remembered only her own innocent love.  She recalled
not herself only, but all her women-friends and acquaintances.
She thought of them on the one day of their triumph, when they
had stood like Kitty under the wedding crown, with love and hope
and dread in their hearts, renouncing the past, and stepping
forward into the mysterious future.  Among the brides that came
back to her memory, she thought too of her darling Anna, of whose
proposed divorce she had just been hearing.  And she had stood
just as innocent in orange flowers and bridal veil.  And now?
"It's terribly strange," she said to herself.  It was not merely
the sisters, the women-friends and female relations of the bride
who were following every detail of the ceremony.  Women who were
quite strangers, mere spectators, were watching it excitedly,
holding their breath, in fear of losing a single movement or
expression of the bride and bridegroom, and angrily not
answering, often not hearing, the remarks of the callous men, who
kept making joking or irrelevant observations.

"Why has she been crying?  Is she being married against her
will?"

"Against her will to a fine fellow like that?  A prince, isn't
he?"

"Is that her sister in the white satin?  Just listen how the
deacon booms out, 'And fearing her husband.'"

"Are the choristers from Tchudovo?"

"No, from the Synod."

"I asked the footman.  He says he's going to take her home to
his country place at once.  Awfully rich, they say.  That's why
she's being married to him."

"No, they're a well-matched pair."

"I say, Marya Vassilievna, you were making out those fly-away
crinolines were not being worn.  Just look at her in the puce
dress--an ambassador's wife they say she is--how her skirt
bounces out from side to side!"

"What a pretty dear the bride is--like a lamb decked with
flowers!  Well, say what you will, we women feel for our sister."

Such were the comments in the crowd of gazing women who had
succeeded in slipping in at the church doors.



Chapter 6


When the ceremony of plighting troth was over, the beadle spread
before the lectern in the middle of the church a piece of pink
silken stuff, the choir sang a complicated and elaborate psalm,
in which the bass and tenor sang responses to one another, and
the priest turning round pointed the bridal pair to the pink silk
rug.  Though both had often heard a great deal about the saying
that the one who steps first on the rug will be the head of the
house, neither Levin nor Kitty were capable of recollecting it,
as they took the few steps towards it.  They did not hear the
loud remarks and disputes that followed, some maintaining he had
stepped on first, and others that both had stepped on together.

After the customary questions, whether they desired to enter upon
matrimony, and whether they were pledged to anyone else, and
their answers, which sounded strange to themselves, a new
ceremony began.  Kitty listened to the words of the prayer,
trying to make out their meaning, but she could not.  The feeling
of triumph and radiant happiness flooded her soul more and more
as the ceremony went on, and deprived her of all power of
attention.

They prayed: "Endow them with continence and fruitfulness, and
vouchsafe that their hearts may rejoice looking upon their sons
and daughters."  They alluded to God's creation of a wife from
Adam's rib "and for this cause a man shall leave father and
mother, and cleave unto his wife, and they two shall be one
flesh," and that "this is a great mystery"; they prayed that God
would make them fruitful and bless them, like Isaac and Rebecca,
Joseph, Moses and Zipporah, and that they might look upon their
children's children.  "That's all splendid," thought Kitty,
catching the words, "all that's just as it should be," and a
smile of happiness, unconsciously reflected in everyone who
looked at her, beamed on her radiant face.

"Put it on quite," voices were heard urging when the priest had
put on the wedding crowns and Shtcherbatsky, his hand shaking in
its three-button glove, held the crown high above her head.

"Put it on!" she whispered, smiling.

Levin looked round at her, and was struck by the joyful radiance
on her face, and unconsciously her feeling infected him.  He too,
like her felt glad and happy.

They enjoyed hearing the epistle read, and the roll of the head
deacon's voice at the last verse, awaited with such impatience by
the outside public.  They enjoyed drinking out of the shallow cup
of warm red wine and water, and they were still more pleased when
the priest, flinging back his stole and taking both their hands
in his, led them round the lectern to the accompaniment of bass
voices chanting "Glory to God."

Shtcherbatsky and Tchirikov, supporting the crowns and stumbling
over the bride's train, smiling too and seeming delighted at
something, were at one moment left behind, at the next treading
on the bridal pair as the priest came to a halt.  The spark of
joy kindled in Kitty seemed to have infected everyone in the
church.  It seemed to Levin that the priest and the deacon too
wanted to smile just as he did.

Taking the crowns off their heads the priest read the last prayer
and congratulated the young people.  Levin looked at Kitty, and
he had never before seen her look as she did.  She was charming
with the new radiance of happiness in her face.  Levin longed to
say something to her, but he did not know whether it was all
over.  The priest got him out of his difficulty.  He smiled his
kindly smile and said gently, "Kiss your wife, and you kiss your
husband," and took the candles out of their hands.

Levin kissed her smiling lips with timid care, gave her his arm,
and with a new strange sense of closeness, walked out of the
church.  He did not believe, he could not believe, that it was
true.  It was only when their wondering and timid eyes met that
he believed in it, because he felt that they were one.

After supper, the same night, the young people left for the
country.



Chapter 7


Vronsky and Anna had been traveling for three months together in
Europe.  They had visited Venice, Rome, and Naples, and had just
arrived at a small Italian town where they meant to stay some
time.  A handsome head waiter, with thick pomaded hair parted
from the neck upwards, an evening coat, a broad white cambric
shirt front, and a bunch of trinkets hanging above his rounded
stomach, stood with his hands in the full curve of his pockets,
looking contemptuously from under his eyelids while he gave some
frigid reply to a gentleman who had stopped him.  Catching the
sound of footsteps coming from the other side of the entry
towards the staircase, the head waiter turned round, and seeing
the Russian count, who had taken their best rooms, he took his
hands out of his pockets deferentially, and with a bow informed
him that a courier had been, and that the business about the
palazzo had been arranged.  The steward was prepared to sign the
agreement.

"Ah!  I'm glad to hear it," said Vronsky.  "Is madame at home or
not?"

"Madame has been out for a walk but has returned now," answered
the waiter.

Vronsky took off his soft, wide-brimmed hat and passed his
handkerchief over his heated brow and hair, which had grown half
over his ears, and was brushed back covering the bald patch on
his head.  And glancing casually at the gentleman, who still
stood there gazing intently at him, he would have gone on.

"This gentleman is a Russian, and was inquiring after you," said
the head waiter.

With mingled feelings of annoyance at never being able to get
away from acquaintances anywhere, and longing to find some sort
of diversion from the monotony of his life, Vronsky looked once
more at the gentleman, who had retreated and stood still again,
and at the same moment a light came into the eyes of both.

"Golenishtchev!"

"Vronsky!"

It really was Golenishtchev, a comrade of Vronsky's in the Corps
of Pages.  In the corps Golenishtchev had belonged to the liberal
party; he left the corps without entering the army, and had never
taken office under the government.  Vronsky and he had gone
completely different ways on leaving the corps, and had only met
once since.

At that meeting Vronsky perceived that Golenishtchev had taken up
a sort of lofty, intellectually liberal line, and was
consequently disposed to look down upon Vronsky's interests and
calling in life.  Hence Vronsky had met him with the chilling and
haughty manner he so well knew how to assume, the meaning of
which was: "You may like or dislike my way of life, that's a
matter of the most perfect indifference to me; you will have to
treat me with respect if you want to know me."  Golenishtchev had
been contemptuously indifferent to the tone taken by Vronsky.
This second meeting might have been expected, one would have
supposed, to estrange them still more.  But now they beamed and
exclaimed with delight on recognizing one another.  Vronsky would
never have expected to be so pleased to see Golenishtchev, but
probably he was not himself aware how bored he was.  He forgot
the disagreeable impression of their last meeting, and with a
face of frank delight held out his hand to his old comrade.  The
same expression of delight replaced the look of uneasiness on
Golenishtchev's face.

"How glad I am to meet you!" said Vronsky, showing his strong
white teeth in a friendly smile.

"I heard the name Vronsky, but I didn't know which one.  I'm
very, very glad!"

"Let's go in.  Come, tell me what you're doing."

"I've been living here for two years.  I'm working."

"Ah!" said Vronsky, with sympathy; "let's go in."  And with the
habit common with Russians, instead of saying in Russian what he
wanted to keep from the servants, he began to speak in French.

"Do you know Madame Karenina?  We are traveling together.  I am
going to see her now," he said in French, carefully scrutinizing
Golenishtchev's face.

"Ah! I did not know" (though he did know), Golenishtchev answered
carelessly.  "Have you been here long?" he added.

"Four days," Vronsky answered, once more scrutinizing his
friend's face intently.

"Yes, he's a decent fellow, and will look at the thing properly,"
Vronsky said to himself, catching the significance of
Golenishtchev's face and the change of subject.  "I can introduce
him to Anna, he looks at it properly."

During those three months that Vronsky had spent abroad with
Anna, he had always on meeting new people asked himself how the
new person would look at his relations with Anna, and for the
most part, in men, he had met with the "proper" way of looking at
it.  But if he had been asked, and those who looked at it
"properly" had been asked, exactly how they did look at it, both
he and they would have been greatly puzzled to answer.

In reality, those who in Vronsky's opinion had the "proper" view
had no sort of view at all, but behaved in general as well-bred
persons do behave in regard to all the complex and insoluble
problems with which life is encompassed on all sides; they
behaved with propriety, avoiding allusions and unpleasant
questions.  They assumed an air of fully comprehending the import
and force of the situation, of accepting and even approving of
it, but of considering it superfluous and uncalled for to put all
this into words.

Vronsky at once divined that Golenishtchev was of this class, and
therefore was doubly pleased to see him.  And in fact,
Golenishtchev's manner to Madame Karenina, when he was taken to
call on her, was all that Vronsky could have desired.  Obviously
without the slightest effort he steered clear of all subjects
which might lead to embarrassment.

He had never met Anna before, and was struck by her beauty, and
still more by the frankness with which she accepted her position.
She blushed when Vronsky brought in Golenishtchev, and he was
extremely charmed by this childish blush overspreading her candid
and handsome face.  But what he liked particularly was the way in
which at once, as though on purpose that there might be no
misunderstanding with an outsider, she called Vronsky simply
Alexey, and said they were moving into a house they had just
taken, what was here called a palazzo.  Golenishtchev liked this
direct and simple attitude to her own position.  Looking at
Anna's manner of simple-hearted, spirited gaiety, and knowing
Alexey Alexandrovitch and Vronsky, Golenishtchev fancied that he
understood her perfectly.  He fancied that he understood what she
was utterly unable to understand: how it was that, having made
her husband wretched, having abandoned him and her son and lost
her good name, she yet felt full of spirits, gaiety, and
happiness.

"It's in the guide-book," said Golenishtchev, referring to the
palazzo Vronsky had taken.  "There's a first-rate Tintoretto
there.  One of his latest period."

"I tell you what: it's a lovely day, let's go and have another
look at it," said Vronsky, addressing Anna.

"I shall be very glad to; I'll go and put on my hat.  Would you
say it's hot?" she said, stopping short in the doorway and
looking inquiringly at Vronsky.  And again a vivid flush
overspread her face.

Vronsky saw from her eyes that she did not know on what terms he
cared to be with Golenishtchev, and so was afraid of not behaving
as he would wish.

He looked a long, tender look at her.

"No, not very," he said.

And it seemed to her that she understood everything, most of all,
that he was pleased with her; and smiling to him, she walked with
her rapid step out at the door.

The friends glanced at one another, and a look of hesitation came
into both faces, as though Golenishtchev, unmistakably admiring
her, would have liked to say something about her, and could not
find the right thing to say, while Vronsky desired and dreaded
his doing so.

"Well then," Vronsky began to start a conversation of some sort;
"so you're settled here?  You're still at the same work, then?"
he went on, recalling that he had been told Golenishtchev was
writing something.

"Yes, I'm writing the second part of the _Two Elements_," said
Golenishtchev, coloring with pleasure at the question--"that is,
to be exact, I am not writing it yet; I am preparing, collecting
materials.  It will be of far wider scope, and will touch on
almost all questions.  We in Russia refuse to see that we are the
heirs of Byzantium," and he launched into a long and heated
explanation of his views.

Vronsky at the first moment felt embarrassed at not even knowing
of the first part of the _Two Elements_, of which the author spoke
as something well known.  But as Golenishtchev began to lay down
his opinions and Vronsky was able to follow them even without
knowing the _Two Elements_, he listened to him with some interest,
for Golenishtchev spoke well.  But Vronsky was startled and
annoyed by the nervous irascibility with which Golenishtchev
talked of the subject that engrossed him.  As he went on talking,
his eyes glittered more and more angrily; he was more and more
hurried in his replies to imaginary opponents, and his face grew
more and more excited and worried.  Remembering Golenishtchev, a
thin, lively, good-natured and well-bred boy, always at the head
of the class, Vronsky could not make out the reason of his
irritability, and he did not like it.  What he particularly
disliked was that Golenishtchev, a man belonging to a good set,
should put himself on a level with some scribbling fellows, with
whom he was irritated and angry.  Was it worth it?  Vronsky
disliked it, yet he felt that Golenishtchev was unhappy, and was
sorry for him.  Unhappiness, almost mental derangement, was
visible on his mobile, rather handsome face, while without even
noticing Anna's coming in, he went on hurriedly and hotly
expressing his views.

When Anna came in in her hat and cape, and her lovely hand
rapidly swinging her parasol, and stood beside him, it was with a
feeling of relief that Vronsky broke away from the plaintive eyes
of Golenishtchev which fastened persistently upon him, and with a
fresh rush of love looked at his charming companion, full of life
and happiness.  Golenishtchev recovered himself with an effort,
and at first was dejected and gloomy, but Anna, disposed to feel
friendly with everyone as she was at that time, soon revived his
spirits by her direct and lively manner.  After trying various
subjects of conversation, she got him upon painting, of which he
talked very well, and she listened to him attentively.  They
walked to the house they had taken, and looked over it.

"I am very glad of one thing," said Anna to Golenishtchev when
they were on their way back, "Alexey will have a capital _atelier_.
You must certainly take that room," she said to Vronsky in
Russian, using the affectionately familiar form as though she saw
that Golenishtchev would become intimate with them in their
isolation, and that there was no need of reserve before him.

"Do you paint?" said Golenishtchev, turning round quickly to
Vronsky.

"Yes, I used to study long ago, and now I have begun to do a
little," said Vronsky, reddening.

"He has great talent," said Anna with a delighted smile.  "I'm no
judge, of course.  But good judges have said the same."



Chapter 8


Anna, in that first period of her emancipation and rapid return
to  health, felt herself unpardonably happy and full of the joy
of life.  The thought of her husband's unhappiness did not poison
her happiness.  On one side that memory was too awful to be
thought of.  On the other side her husband's unhappiness had
given her too much happiness to be regretted.  The memory of all
that had happened after her illness: her reconciliation with her
husband, its breakdown, the news of Vronsky's wound, his visit,
the preparations for divorce, the departure from her husband's
house, the parting from her son--all that seemed to her like a
delirious dream, from which she had waked up alone with Vronsky
abroad.  The thought of the harm caused to her husband aroused in
her a feeling like repulsion, and akin to what a drowning man
might feel who has shaken off another man clinging to him.  That
man did drown.  It was an evil action, of course, but it was the
sole means of escape, and better not to brood over these fearful
facts.

One consolatory reflection upon her conduct had occurred to her
at the first moment of the final rupture, and when now she
recalled all the past, she remembered that one reflection.  "I
have inevitably made that man wretched," she thought; "but I
don't want to profit by his misery.  I too am suffering, and
shall suffer; I am losing what I prized above everything--I am
losing my good name and my son.  I have done wrong, and so I
don't want happiness, I don't want a divorce, and shall suffer
from my shame and the separation from my child."  But, however
sincerely Anna had meant to suffer, she was not suffering.  Shame
there was not.  With the tact of which both had such a large
share, they had succeeded in avoiding Russian ladies abroad, and
so had never placed themselves in a false position, and
everywhere they had met people who pretended that they perfectly
understood their position, far better indeed than they did
themselves.  Separation from the son she loved--even that did not
cause her anguish in these early days.  The baby girl--_his_
child--was so sweet, and had so won Anna's heart, since she was
all that was left her, that Anna rarely thought of her son.

The desire for life, waxing stronger with recovered health, was
so intense, and the conditions of life were so new and pleasant,
that Anna felt unpardonably happy.  The more she got to know
Vronsky, the more she loved him.  She loved him for himself, and
for his love for her.  Her complete ownership of him was a
continual joy to her.  His presence was always sweet to her.  All
the traits of his character, which she learned to know better and
better, were unutterably dear to her.  His appearance, changed by
his civilian dress, was as fascinating to her as though she were
some young girl in love.  In everything he said, thought, and
did, she saw something particularly noble and elevated.  Her
adoration of him alarmed her indeed; she sought and could not
find in him anything not fine.  She dared not show him her sense
of her own insignificance beside him.  It seemed to her that,
knowing this, he might sooner cease to love her; and she dreaded
nothing now so much as losing his love, though she had no grounds
for fearing it.  But she could not help being grateful to him for
his attitude to her, and showing that she appreciated it.  He,
who had in her opinion such a marked aptitude for a political
career, in which he would have been certain to play a leading
part--he had sacrificed his ambition for her sake, and never
betrayed the slightest regret.  He was more lovingly respectful
to her than ever, and the constant care that she should not feel
the awkwardness of her position never deserted him for a single
instant.  He, so manly a man, never opposed her, had indeed, with
her, no will of his own, and was anxious, it seemed, for nothing
but to anticipate her wishes.  And she could not but appreciate
this, even though the very intensity of his solicitude for her,
the atmosphere of care with which he surrounded her, sometimes
weighed upon her.

Vronsky, meanwhile, in spite of the complete realization of what
he had so long desired, was not perfectly happy.  He soon felt
that the realization of his desires gave him no more than a grain
of sand out of the mountain of happiness he had expected.  It
showed him the mistake men make in picturing to themselves
happiness as the realization of their desires.  For a time after
joining his life to hers, and putting on civilian dress, he had
felt all the delight of freedom in general of which he had known
nothing before, and of freedom in his love,--and he was content,
but not for long.  He was soon aware that there was springing up
in his heart a desire for desires--_ennui_.  Without conscious
intention he began to clutch at every passing caprice, taking it
for a desire and an object.  Sixteen hours of the day must be
occupied in some way, since they were living abroad in complete
freedom, outside the conditions of social life which filled up
time in Petersburg.  As for the amusements of bachelor existence,
which had provided Vronsky with entertainment on previous tours
abroad, they could not be thought of, since the sole attempt of
the sort had led to a sudden attack of depression in Anna, quite
out of proportion with the cause--a late supper with bachelor
friends.  Relations with the society of the place--foreign and
Russian--were equally out of the question owing to the
irregularity of their position.  The inspection of objects of
interest, apart from the fact that everything had been seen
already, had not for Vronsky, a Russian and a sensible man, the
immense significance Englishmen are able to attach to that
pursuit.

And just as the hungry stomach eagerly accepts every object it
can get, hoping to find nourishment in it, Vronsky quite
unconsciously clutched first at politics, then at new books, and
then at pictures.

As he had from a child a taste for painting, and as, not knowing
what to spend his money on, he had begun collecting engravings,
he came to a stop at painting, began to take interest in it, and
concentrated upon it the unoccupied mass of desires which
demanded satisfaction.

He had a ready appreciation of art, and probably, with a taste
for imitating art, he supposed himself to have the real thing
essential for an artist, and after hesitating for some time which
style of painting to select--religious, historical, realistic, or
genre painting--he set to work to paint.  He appreciated all
kinds, and could have felt inspired by any one of them; but he
had no conception of the possibility of knowing nothing at all of
any school of painting, and of being inspired directly by what is
within the soul, without caring whether what is painted will
belong to any recognized school.  Since he knew nothing of this,
and drew his inspiration, not directly from life, but indirectly
from life embodied in art, his inspiration came very quickly and
easily, and as quickly and easily came his success in painting
something very similar to the sort of painting he was trying to
imitate.

More than any other style he liked the French--graceful and
effective--and in that style he began to paint Anna's portrait in
Italian costume, and the portrait seemed to him, and to everyone
who saw it, extremely successful.



Chapter 9


The old neglected palazzo, with its lofty carved ceilings and
frescoes on the walls, with its floors of mosaic, with its heavy
yellow stuff curtains on the windows, with its vases on
pedestals, and its open fireplaces, its carved doors and gloomy
reception rooms, hung with pictures--this palazzo did much, by
its very appearance after they had moved into it, to confirm in
Vronsky the agreeable illusion that he was not so much a Russian
country gentleman, a retired army officer, as an enlightened
amateur and patron of the arts, himself a modest artist who had
renounced the world, his connections, and his ambition for the
sake of the woman he loved.

The pose chosen by Vronsky with their removal into the palazzo
was completely successful, and having, through Golenishtchev,
made acquaintance with a few interesting people, for a time he
was satisfied.  He painted studies from nature under the guidance
of an Italian professor of painting, and studied mediaeval
Italian life.  Mediaeval Italian life so fascinated Vronsky that
he even wore a hat and flung a cloak over his shoulder in the
mediaeval style, which, indeed, was extremely becoming to him.

"Here we live, and know nothing of what's going on," Vronsky said
to Golenishtchev as he came to see him one morning.  "Have you
seen Mihailov's picture?" he said, handing him a Russian gazette
he had received that morning, and pointing to an article on a
Russian artist, living in the very same town, and just finishing
a picture which had long been talked about, and had been bought
beforehand.  The article reproached the government and the
academy for letting so remarkable an artist be left without
encouragement and support.

"I've seen it," answered Golenishtchev.  "Of course, he's not
without talent, but it's all in a wrong direction.  It's all the
Ivanov-Strauss-Renan attitude to Christ and to religious
painting."

"What is the subject of the picture?" asked Anna.

"Christ before Pilate.  Christ is represented as a Jew with all
the realism of the new school."

And the question of the subject of the picture having brought him
to one of his favorite theories, Golenishtchev launched forth
into a disquisition on it.

"I can't understand how they can fall into such a gross mistake.
Christ always has His definite embodiment in the art of the great
masters.  And therefore, if they want to depict, not God, but a
revolutionist or a sage, let them take from history a Socrates, a
Franklin, a Charlotte Corday, but not Christ.  They take the very
figure which cannot be taken for their art, and then..."

"And is it true that this Mihailov is in such poverty?" asked
Vronsky, thinking that, as a Russian Maecenas, it was his duty to
assist the artist regardless of whether the picture were good or
bad.

"I should say not.  He's a remarkable portrait-painter.  Have you
ever seen his portrait of Madame Vassiltchikova? But I believe he
doesn't care about painting any more portraits, and so very
likely he is in want.  I maintain that..."

"Couldn't we ask him to paint a portrait of Anna Arkadyevna?"
said Vronsky.

"Why mine?" said Anna.  "After yours I don't want another
portrait.  Better have one of Annie" (so she called her baby
girl).  "Here she is," she added, looking out of the window at
the handsome Italian nurse, who was carrying the child out into
the garden, and immediately glancing unnoticed at Vronsky.  The
handsome nurse, from whom Vronsky was painting a head for his
picture, was the one hidden grief in Anna's life.  He painted
with her as his model, admired her beauty and mediaevalism, and
Anna dared not confess to herself that she was afraid of becoming
jealous of this nurse, and was for that reason particularly
gracious and condescending both to her and her little son.
Vronsky, too, glanced out of the window and into Anna's eyes,
and, turning at once to Golenishtchev, he said:

"Do you know this Mihailov?"

"I have met him.  But he's a queer fish, and quite without
breeding.  You know, one of those uncouth new people one's so
often coming across nowadays, one of those free-thinkers you
know, who are reared _d'emblée_ in theories of atheism, scepticism,
and materialism.  In former days," said Golenishtchev, not
observing, or not willing to observe, that both Anna and Vronsky
wanted to speak, "in former days the free-thinker was a man who
had been brought up in ideas of religion, law, and morality, and
only through conflict and struggle came to free-thought; but now
there has sprung up a new type of born free-thinkers who grow up
without even having heard of principles of morality or of
religion, of the existence of authorities, who grow up directly
in ideas of negation in everything, that is to say, savages.
Well, he's of that class.  He's the son, it appears, of some
Moscow butler, and has never had any sort of bringing-up.  When
he got into the academy and made his reputation he tried, as he's
no fool, to educate himself.  And he turned to what seemed to him
the very source of culture--the magazines.  In old times, you
see, a man who wanted to educate himself--a Frenchman, for
instance--would have set to work to study all the classics and
theologians and tragedians and historiaris and philosophers, and,
you know, all the intellectual work that came in his way.  But in
our day he goes straight for the literature of negation, very
quickly assimilates all the extracts of the science of negation,
and he's ready.  And that's not all--twenty years ago he would
have found in that literature traces of conflict with
authorities, with the creeds of the ages; he would have perceived
from this conflict that there was something else; but now he
comes at once upon a literature in which the old creeds do not
even furnish matter for discussion, but it is stated baldly that
there is nothing else--evolution, natural selection, struggle for
existence--and that's all.  In my article I've..."

"I tell you what," said Anna, who had for a long while been
exchanging wary glances with Vronsky, and knew that he was not in
the least interested in the education of this artist, but was
simply absorbed by the idea of assisting him, and ordering a
portrait of him; "I tell you what," she said, resolutely
interrupting Golenishtchev, who was still talking away, "let's go
and see him!"

Golenishtchev recovered his self-possession and readily agreed.
But as the artist lived in a remote suburb, it was decided to
take the carriage.

An hour later Anna, with Golenishtchev by her side and Vronsky on
the front seat of the carriage, facing them, drove up to a new
ugly house in the remote suburb.  On learning from the porter's
wife, who came out to them, that Mihailov saw visitors at his
studio, but that at that moment he was in his lodging only a
couple of steps off, they sent her to him with their cards,
asking permission to see his picture.



Chapter 10



The artist Mihailov was, as always, at work when the cards of
Count Vronsky and Golenishtchev were brought to him.  In the
morning he had been working in his studio at his big picture.  On
getting home he flew into a rage with his wife for not having
managed to put off the landlady, who had been asking for money.

"I've said it to you twenty times, don't enter into details.
You're fool enough at all times, and when you start explaining
things in Italian you're a fool three times as foolish," he said
after a long dispute.

"Don't let it run so long; it's not my fault.  If I had the
money..."

"Leave me in peace, for God's sake!" Mihailov shrieked, with
tears in his voice, and, stopping his ears, he went off into his
working room, the other side of a partition wall, and closed the
door after him.  "Idiotic woman!" he said to himself, sat down to
the table, and, opening a portfolio, he set to work at once with
peculiar fervor at a sketch he had begun.

Never did he work with such fervor and success as when things
went ill with him, and especially when he quarreled with his
wife.  "Oh! damn them all!" he thought as he went on working.  He
was making a sketch for the figure of a man in a violent rage.  A
sketch had been made before, but he was dissatisfied with it.
"No, that one was better...where is it?"  He went back to his
wife, and scowling, and not looking at her, asked his eldest
little girl, where was that piece of paper he had given them?
The paper with the discarded sketch on it was found, but it was
dirty, and spotted with candle-grease.  Still, he took the
sketch, laid it on his table, and, moving a little away, screwing
up his eyes, he fell to gazing at it.  All at once he smiled and
gesticulated gleefully.

"That's it! that's it!" he said, and, at once picking up the
pencil, he began rapidly drawing.  The spot of tallow had given
the man a new pose.

He had sketched this new pose, when all at once he recalled the
face of a shopkeeper of whom he had bought cigars, a vigorous
face with a prominent chin, and he sketched this very face, this
chin on to the figure of the man.  He laughed aloud with delight.
The figure from a lifeless imagined thing had become living, and
such that it could never be changed.  That figure lived, and was
clearly and unmistakably defined.  The sketch might be corrected
in accordance with the requirements of the figure, the legs,
indeed, could and must be put differently, and the position of
the left hand must be quite altered; the hair too might be thrown
back.  But in making these corrections he was not altering the
figure but simply getting rid of what concealed the figure.  He
was, as it were, stripping off the wrappings which hindered it
from being distinctly seen.  Each new feature only brought out
the whole figure in all its force and vigor, as it had suddenly
come to him from the spot of tallow.  He was carefully finishing
the figure when the cards were brought him.

"Coming, coming!"

He went in to his wife.

"Come, Sasha, don't be cross!" he said, smiling timidly and
affectionately at her.  "You were to blame.  I was to blame.
I'll make it all right."  And having made peace with his wife he
put on an olive-green overcoat with a velvet collar and a hat,
and went towards his studio.  The successful figure he had
already forgotten.  Now he was delighted and excited at the visit
of these people of consequence, Russians, who had come in their
carriage.

Of his picture, the one that stood now on his easel, he had at
the bottom of his heart one conviction--that no one had ever
painted a picture like it.  He did not believe that his picture
was better than all the pictures of Raphael, but he knew that
what he tried to convey in that picture, no one ever had
conveyed.  This he knew positively, and had known a long while,
ever since he had begun to paint it.  But other people's
criticisms, whatever they might be, had yet immense consequence
in his eyes, and they agitated him to the depths of his soul.
Any remark, the most insignificant, that showed that the critic
saw even the tiniest part of what he saw in the picture, agitated
him to the depths of his soul.  He always attributed to his
critics a more profound comprehension than he had himself, and
always expected from them something he did not himself see in the
picture.  And often in their criticisms he fancied that he had
found this.

He walked rapidly to the door of his studio, and in spite of his
excitement he was struck by the soft light on Anna's figure as
she stood in the shade of the entrance listening to
Golenishtchev, who was eagerly telling her something, while she
evidently wanted to look round at the artist.  He was himself
unconscious how, as he approached them, he seized on this
impression and absorbed it, as he had the chin of the shopkeeper
who had sold him the cigars, and put it away somewhere to be
brought out when he wanted it.  The visitors, not agreeably
impressed beforehand by Golenishtchev's account of the artist,
were still less so by his personal appearance.  Thick-set and of
middle height, with nimble movements, with his brown hat,
olive-green coat and narrow trousers--though wide trousers had
been a long while in fashion,--most of all, with the ordinariness
of his broad face, and the combined expression of timidity and
anxiety to keep up his dignity, Mihailov made an unpleasant
impression.

"Please step in," he said, trying to look indifferent, and going
into the passage he took a key out of his pocket and opened the
door.



Chapter 11


On entering the studio, Mihailov once more scanned his visitors
and noted down in his imagination Vronsky's expression too, and
especially his jaws.  Although his artistic sense was unceasingly
at work collecting materials, although he felt a continually
increasing excitement as the moment of criticizing his work drew
nearer, he rapidly and subtly formed, from imperceptible signs, a
mental image of these three persons.

That fellow (Golenishtchev) was a Russian living here.  Mihailov
did not remember his surname nor where he had met him, nor what
he had said to him.  He only remembered his face as he remembered
all the faces he had ever seen; but he remembered, too, that it
was one of the faces laid by in his memory in the immense class
of the falsely consequential and poor in expression.  The
abundant hair and very open forehead gave an appearance of
consequence to the face, which had only one expression--a petty,
childish, peevish expression, concentrated just above the bridge
of the narrow nose.  Vronsky and Madame Karenina must be,
Mihailov supposed, distinguished and wealthy Russians, knowing
nothing about art, like all those wealthy Russians, but posing as
amateurs and connoisseurs.  "Most likely they've already looked
at all the antiques, and now they're making the round of the
studios of the new people, the German humbug, and the cracked
Pre-Raphaelite English fellow, and have only come to me to make
the point of view complete," he thought.  He was well acquainted
with the way dilettanti have (the cleverer they were the worse he
found them) of looking at the works of contemporary artists with
the sole object of being in a position to say that art is a thing
of the past, and that the more one sees of the new men the more
one sees how inimitable the works of the great old masters have
remained.  He expected all this; he saw it all in their faces, he
saw it in the careless indifference with which they talked among
themselves, stared at the lay figures and busts, and walked about
in leisurely fashion, waiting for him to uncover his picture.
But in spite of this, while he was turning over his studies,
pulling up the blinds and taking off the sheet, he was in intense
excitement, especially as, in spite of his conviction that all
distinguished and wealthy Russians were certain to be beasts and
fools, he liked Vronsky, and still more Anna.

"Here, if you please," he said, moving on one side with his
nimble gait and pointing to his picture, "it's the exhortation to
Pilate.  Matthew, chapter xxvii," he said, feeling his lips were
beginning to tremble with emotion.  He moved away and stood
behind them.

For the few seconds during which the visitors were gazing at the
picture in silence Mihailov too gazed at it with the indifferent
eye of an outsider.  For those few seconds he was sure in
anticipation that a higher, juster criticism would be uttered by
them, by those very visitors whom he had been so despising a
moment before.  He forgot all he had thought about his picture
before during the three years he had been painting it; he forgot
all its qualities which had been absolutely certain to him--he
saw the picture with their indifferent, new, outside eyes, and
saw nothing good in it.  He saw in the foreground Pilate's
irritated face and the serene face of Christ, and in the
background the figures of Pilate's retinue and the face of John
watching what was happening.  Every face that, with such agony,
such blunders and corrections had grown up within him with its
special character, every face that had given him such torments
and such raptures, and all these faces so many times transposed
for the sake of the harmony of the whole, all the shades of color
and tones that he had attained with such labor--all of this
together seemed to him now, looking at it with their eyes, the
merest vulgarity, something that had been done a thousand times
over.  The face dearest to him, the face of Christ, the center of
the picture, which had given him such ecstasy as it unfolded
itself to him, was utterly lost to him when he glanced at the
picture with their eyes.  He saw a well-painted (no, not even
that--he distinctly saw now a mass of defects) repetition of
those endless Christs of Titian, Raphael, Rubens, and the same
soldiers and Pilate.  It was all common, poor, and stale, and
positively badly painted--weak and unequal.  They would be
justified in repeating hypocritically civil speeches in the
presence of the painter, and pitying him and laughing at him when
they were alone again.

The silence (though it lasted no more than a minute) became too
intolerable to him.  To break it, and to show he was not
agitated, he made an effort and addressed Golenishtchev.

"I think I've had the pleasure of meeting you," he said, looking
uneasily first at Anna, then at Vronsky, in fear of losing any
shade of their expression.

"To be sure!  We met at Rossi's, do you remember, at that _soirée_
when that Italian lady recited--the new Rachel?" Golenishtchev
answered easily, removing his eyes without the slightest regret
from the picture and turning to the artist.

Noticing, however, that Mihailov was expecting a criticism of the
picture, he said:

"Your picture has got on a great deal since I saw it last time;
and what strikes me particularly now, as it did then, is the
figure of Pilate.  One so knows the man: a good-natured, capital
fellow, but an official through and through, who does not know
what it is he's doing.  But I fancy..."

All Mihailov's mobile face beamed at once; his eyes sparkled.  He
tried to say something, but he could not speak for excitement,
and pretended to be coughing.  Low as was his opinion of
Golenishtchev's capacity for understanding art, trifling as was
the true remark upon the fidelity of the expression of Pilate as
an official, and offensive as might have seemed the utterance of
so unimportant an observation while nothing was said of more
serious points, Mihailov was in an ecstasy of delight at this
observation.  He had himself thought about Pilate's figure just
what Golenishtchev said.  The fact that this reflection was but
one of millions of reflections, which as Mihailov knew for
certain would be true, did not diminish for him the significance
of Golenishtchev's remark.  His heart warmed to Golenishtchev for
this remark, and from a state of depression he suddenly passed to
ecstasy.  At once the whole of his picture lived before him in
all the indescribable complexity of everything living.  Mihailov
again tried to say that that was how he understood Pilate, but
his lips quivered intractably, and he could not pronounce the
words.  Vronsky and Anna too said something in that subdued voice
in which, partly to avoid hurting the artist's feelings and
partly to avoid saying out loud something silly--so easily said
when talking of art--people usually speak at exhibitions of
pictures.  Mihailov fancied that the picture had made an
impression on them too.  He went up to them.

"How marvelous Christ's expression is!" said Anna.  Of all she
saw she liked that expression most of all, and she felt that it
was the center of the picture, and so praise of it would be
pleasant to the artist.  "One can see that He is pitying Pilate."

This again was one of the million true reflections that could be
found in his picture and in the figure of Christ.  She said that
He was pitying Pilate.  In Christ's expression there ought to be
indeed an expression of pity, since there is an expression of
love, of heavenly peace, of readiness for death, and a sense of
the vanity of words.  Of course there is the expression of an
official in Pilate and of pity in Christ, seeing that one is the
incarnation of the fleshly and the other of the spiritual life.
All this and much more flashed into Mihailov's thoughts.

"Yes, and how that figure is done--what atmosphere!  One can walk
round it," said Golenishtchev, unmistakably betraying by this
remark that he did not approve of the meaning and idea of the
figure.

"Yes, there's a wonderful mastery!" said Vronsky.  "How those
figures in the background stand out!  There you have technique,"
he said, addressing Golenishtchev, alluding to a conversation
between them about Vronsky's despair of attaining this technique.

"Yes, yes, marvelous!" Golenishtchev and Anna assented.  In spite
of the excited condition in which he was, the sentence about
technique had sent a pang to Mihailov's heart, and looking
angrily at Vronsky he suddenly scowled.  He had often heard this
word technique, and was utterly unable to understand what was
understood by it.  He knew that by this term was understood a
mechanical facility for painting or drawing, entirely apart from
its subject.  He had noticed often that even in actual praise
technique was opposed to essential quality, as though one could
paint well something that was bad.  He knew that a great deal of
attention and care was necessary in taking off the coverings, to
avoid injuring the creation itself, and to take off all the
coverings; but there was no art of painting--no technique of any
sort--about it.  If to a little child or to his cook were
revealed what he saw, it or she would have been able to peel the
wrappings off what was seen.  And the most experienced and adroit
painter could not by mere mechanical facility paint anything if
the lines of the subject were not revealed to him first.
Besides, he saw that if it came to talking about technique, it
was impossible to praise him for it.  In all he had painted and
repainted he saw faults that hurt his eyes, coming from want of
care in taking off the wrappings--faults he could not correct now
without spoiling the whole.  And in almost all the figures and
faces he saw, too, remnants of the wrappings not perfectly
removed that spoiled the picture.

"One thing might be said, if you will allow me to make the
remark..." observed Golenishtchev.

"Oh, I shall be delighted, I beg you," said Mihailov with a
forced smile.

"That is, that you make Him the man-god, and not the God-man.
But I know that was what you meant to do."

"I cannot paint a Christ that is not in my heart," said Mihailov
gloomily.

"Yes; but in that case, if you will allow me to say what I
think....  Your picture is so fine that my observation cannot
detract from it, and, besides, it is only my personal opinion.
With you it is different.  Your very motive is different.  But
let us take Ivanov.  I imagine that if Christ is brought down to
the level of an historical character, it would have been better
for Ivanov to select some other historical subject, fresh,
untouched."

"But if this is the greatest subject presented to art?"

"If one looked one would find others.  But the point is that art
cannot suffer doubt and discussion.  And before the picture of
Ivanov the question arises for the believer and the unbeliever
alike, 'Is it God, or is it not God?' and the unity of the
impression is destroyed."

"Why so?  I think that for educated people," said Mihailov, "the
question cannot exist."

Golenishtchev did not agree with this, and confounded Mihailov by
his support of his first idea of the unity of the impression
being essential to art.

Mihailov was greatly perturbed, but he could say nothing in
defense of his own idea.



Chapter 12


Anna and Vronsky had long been exchanging glances, regretting
their friend's flow of cleverness.  At last Vronsky, without
waiting for the artist, walked away to another small picture.

"Oh, how exquisite!  What a lovely thing!  A gem!  How
exquisite!" they cried with one voice.

"What is it they're so pleased with?" thought Mihailov.  He had
positively forgotten that picture he had painted three years ago.
He had forgotten all the agonies and the ecstasies he had lived
through with that picture when for several months it had been the
one thought haunting him day and night.  He had forgotten, as he
always forgot, the pictures he had finished.  He did not even
like to look at it, and had only brought it out because he was
expecting an Englishman who wanted to buy it.

"Oh, that's only an old study," he said.

"How fine!" said Golenishtchev, he too, with unmistakable
sincerity, falling under the spell of the picture.

Two boys were angling in the shade of a willow-tree.  The elder
had just dropped in the hook, and was carefully pulling the float
from behind a bush, entirely absorbed in what he was doing.  The
other, a little younger, was lying in the grass leaning on his
elbows, with his tangled, flaxen head in his hands, staring at
the water with his dreamy blue eyes.  What was he thinking of?

The enthusiasm over this picture stirred some of the old feeling
for it in Mihailov, but he feared and disliked this waste of
feeling for things past, and so, even though this praise was
grateful to him, he tried to draw his visitors away to a third
picture.

But Vronsky asked whether the picture was for sale.  To Mihailov
at that moment, excited by visitors, it was extremely distasteful
to speak of money matters.

"It is put up there to be sold," he answered, scowling gloomily.

When the visitors had gone, Mihailov sat down opposite the
picture of Pilate and Christ, and in his mind went over what had
been said, and what, though not said, had been implied by those
visitors.  And, strange to say, what had had such weight with
him, while they were there and while he mentally put himself at
their point of view, suddenly lost all importance for him.  He
began to look at his picture with all his own full artist vision,
and was soon in that mood of conviction of the perfectibility,
and so of the significance, of his picture--a conviction
essential to the most intense fervor, excluding all other
interests--in which alone he could work.

Christ's foreshortened leg was not right, though.  He took his
palette and began to work.  As he corrected the leg he looked
continually at the figure of John in the background, which his
visitors had not even noticed, but which he knew was beyond
perfection.  When he had finished the leg he wanted to touch that
figure, but he felt too much excited for it.  He was equally
unable to work when he was cold and when he was too much affected
and saw everything too much.  There was only one stage in the
transition from coldness to inspiration, at which work was
possible.  Today he was too much agitated.  He would have covered
the picture, but he stopped, holding the cloth in his hand, and,
smiling blissfully, gazed a long while at the figure of John.  At
last, as it were regretfully tearing himself away, he dropped the
cloth, and, exhausted but happy, went home.

Vronsky, Anna, and Golenishtchev, on their way home, were
particularly lively and cheerful.  They talked of Mihailov and
his pictures.  The word _talent_, by which they meant an inborn,
almost physical, aptitude apart from brain and heart, and in
which they tried to find an expression for all the artist had
gained from life, recurred particularly often in their talk, as
though it were necessary for them to sum up what they had no
conception of, though they wanted to talk of it.  They said that
there was no denying his talent, but that his talent could not
develop for want of education--the common defect of our Russian
artists.  But the picture of the boys had imprinted itself on
their memories, and they were continually coming back to it.
"What an exquisite thing!  How he has succeeded in it, and how
simply!  He doesn't even comprehend how good it is.  Yes, I
mustn't let it slip; I must buy it," said Vronsky.



Chapter 13


Mihailov sold Vronsky his picture, and agreed to paint a
portrait of Anna.  On the day fixed he came and began the work.

From the fifth sitting the portrait impressed everyone,
especially Vronsky, not only by its resemblance, but by its
characteristic beauty.  It was strange how Mihailov could have
discovered just her characteristic beauty.  "One needs to know
and love her as I have loved her to discover the very sweetest
expression of her soul," Vronsky thought, though it was only from
this portrait that he had himself learned this sweetest
expression of her soul.  But the expression was so true that he,
and others too, fancied they had long known it.

"I have been struggling on for ever so long without doing
anything," he said of his own portrait of her, "and he just
looked and painted it.  That's where technique comes in."

"That will come," was the consoling reassurance given him by
Golenishtchev, in whose view Vronsky had both talent, and what
was most important, culture, giving him a wider outlook on art.
Golenishtchev's faith in Vronsky's talent was propped up by his
own need of Vronsky's sympathy and approval for his own articles
and ideas, and he felt that the praise and support must be
mutual.

In another man's house, and especially in Vronsky's palazzo,
Mihailov was quite a different man from what he was in his
studio.  He behaved with hostile courtesy, as though he were
afraid of coming closer to people he did not respect.  He called
Vronsky "your excellency," and notwithstanding Anna's and
Vronsky's invitations, he would never stay to dinner, nor come
except for the sittings.  Anna was even more friendly to him than
to other people, and was very grateful for her portrait.  Vronsky
was more than cordial with him, and was obviously interested to
know the artist's opinion of his picture.  Golenishtchev never
let slip an opportunity of instilling sound ideas about art into
Mihailov.  But Mihailov remained equally chilly to all of them.
Anna was aware from his eyes that he liked looking at her, but he
avoided conversation with her.  Vronsky's talk about his painting
he met with stubborn silence, and he was as stubbornly silent
when he was shown Vronsky's picture.  He was unmistakably bored
by Golenishtchev's conversation, and he did not attempt to oppose
him.

Altogether Mihailov, with his reserved and disagreeable, as it
were, hostile attitude, was quite disliked by them as they got to
know him better; and they were glad when the sittings were over,
and they were left with a magnificent portrait in their
possession, and he gave up coming.  Golenishtchev was the first
to give expression to an idea that had occurred to all of them,
which was that Mihailov was simply jealous of Vronsky.

"Not envious, let us say, since he has _talent_; but it annoys him
that a wealthy man of the highest society, and a count, too (you
know they all detest a title), can, without any particular
trouble, do as well, if not better, than he who has devoted all
his life to it.  And more than all, it's a question of culture,
which he is without."

Vronsky defended Mihailov, but at the bottom of his heart he
believed it, because in his view a man of a different, lower
world would be sure to be envious.

Anna's portrait--the same subject painted from nature both by him
and by Mihailov--ought to have shown Vronsky the difference
between him and Mihailov; but he did not see it.  Only after
Mihailov's portrait was painted he left off painting his portrait
of Anna, deciding that it was now not needed.  His picture of
mediaeval life he went on with.  And he himself, and
Golenishtchev, and still more Anna, thought it very good, because
it was far more like the celebrated pictures they knew than
Mihailov's picture.

Mihailov meanwhile, although Anna's portrait greatly fascinated
him, was even more glad than they were when the sittings were
over, and he had no longer to listen to Golenishtchev's
disquisitions upon art, and could forget about Vronsky's
painting.  He knew that Vronsky could not be prevented from
amusing himself with painting; he knew that he and all dilettanti
had a perfect right to paint what they liked, but it was
distasteful to him.  A man could not be prevented from making
himself a big wax doll, and kissing it.  But if the man were to
come with the doll and sit before a man in love, and begin
caressing his doll as the lover caressed the woman he loved, it
would be distasteful to the lover.  Just such a distasteful
sensation was what Mihailov felt at the sight of Vronsky's
painting: he felt it both ludicrous and irritating, both pitiable
and offensive.

Vronsky's interest in painting and the Middle Ages did not last
long.  He had enough taste for painting to be unable to finish
his picture.  The picture came to a standstill.  He was vaguely
aware that its defects, inconspicuous at first, would be glaring
if he were to go on with it.  The same experience befell him as
Golenishtchev, who felt that he had nothing to say, and
continually deceived himself with the theory that his idea was
not yet mature, that he was working it out and collecting
materials.  This exasperated and tortured Golenishtchev, but
Vronsky was incapable of deceiving and torturing himself, and
even more incapable of exasperation.  With his characteristic
decision, without explanation or apology, he simply ceased
working at painting.

But without this occupation, the life of Vronsky and of Anna, who
wondered at his loss of interest in it, struck them as
intolerably tedious in an Italian town.  The palazzo suddenly
seemed so obtrusively old and dirty, the spots on the curtains,
the cracks in the floors, the broken plaster on the cornices
became so disagreeably obvious, and the everlasting sameness of
Golenishtchev, and the Italian professor and the German traveler
became so wearisome, that they had to make some change.  They
resolved to go to Russia, to the country.  In Petersburg Vronsky
intended to arrange a partition of the land with his brother,
while Anna meant to see her son.  The summer they intended to
spend on Vronsky's great family estate.



Chapter 14


Levin had been married three months.  He was happy, but not at
all in the way he had expected to be.  At every step he found his
former dreams disappointed, and new, unexpected surprises of
happiness.  He was happy; but on entering upon family life he saw
at every step that it was utterly different from what he had
imagined.  At every step he experienced what a man would
experience who, after admiring the smooth, happy course of a
little boat on a lake, should get himself into that little boat.
He saw that it was not all sitting still, floating smoothly; that
one had to think too, not for an instant to forget where one was
floating; and that there was water under one, and that one must
row; and that his unaccustomed hands would be sore; and that it
was only to look at it that was easy; but that doing it, though
very delightful, was very difficult.

As a bachelor, when he had watched other people's married life,
seen the petty cares, the squabbles, the jealousy, he had only
smiled contemptuously in his heart.  In his future married life
there could be, he was convinced, nothing of that sort; even the
external forms, indeed, he fancied, must be utterly unlike the
life of others in everything.  And all of a sudden, instead of
his life with his wife being made on an individual pattern, it
was, on the contrary, entirely made up of the pettiest details,
which he had so despised before, but which now, by no will of his
own, had gained an extraordinary importance that it was useless
to contend against.  And Levin saw that the organization of all
these details was by no means so easy as he had fancied before.
Although Levin believed himself to have the most exact
conceptions of domestic life, unconsciously, like all men, he
pictured domestic life as the happiest enjoyment of love, with
nothing to hinder and no petty cares to distract.  He ought, as
he conceived the position, to do his work, and to find repose
from it in the happiness of love.  She ought to be beloved, and
nothing more.  But, like all men, he forgot that she too would
want work.  And he was surprised that she, his poetic, exquisite
Kitty, could, not merely in the first weeks, but even in the
first days of their married life, think, remember, and busy
herself about tablecloths, and furniture, about mattresses for
visitors, about a tray, about the cook, and the dinner, and so
on.  While they were still engaged, he had been struck by the
definiteness with which she had declined the tour abroad and
decided to go into the country, as though she knew of something
she wanted, and could still think of something outside her love.
This had jarred upon him then, and now her trivial cares and
anxieties jarred upon him several times.  But he saw that this
was essential for her.  And, loving her as he did, though he did
not understand the reason of them, and jeered at these domestic
pursuits, he could not help admiring them.  He jeered at the way
in which she arranged the furniture they had brought from Moscow;
rearranged their room; hung up curtains; prepared rooms for
visitors; a room for Dolly; saw after an abode for her new maid;
ordered dinner of the old cook; came into collision with Agafea
Mihalovna, taking from her the charge of the stores.  He saw how
the old cook smiled, admiring her, and listening to her
inexperienced, impossible orders, how mournfully and tenderly
Agafea Mihalovna shook her head over the young mistress's new
arrangements.  He saw that Kitty was extraordinarily sweet when,
laughing and crying, she came to tell him that her maid, Masha,
was used to looking upon her as her young lady, and so no one
obeyed her.  It seemed to him sweet, but strange, and he thought
it would have been better without this.

He did not know how great a sense of change she was experiencing;
she, who at home had sometimes wanted some favorite dish, or
sweets, without the possibility of getting either, now could
order what she liked, buy pounds of sweets, spend as much money
as she liked, and order any puddings she pleased.

She was dreaming with delight now of Dolly's coming to them with
her children, especially because she would order for the children
their favorite puddings and Dolly would appreciate all her new
housekeeping.  She did not know herself why and wherefore, but
the arranging of her house had an irresistible attraction for
her.  Instinctively feeling the approach of spring, and knowing
that there would be days of rough weather too, she built her nest
as best she could, and was in haste at the same time to build it
and to learn how to do it.

This care for domestic details in Kitty, so opposed to Levin's
ideal of exalted happiness, was at first one of the
disappointments; and this sweet care of her household, the aim of
which he did not understand, but could not help loving, was one
of the new happy surprises.

Another disappointment and happy surprise came in their quarrels.
Levin could never have conceived that between him and his wife
any relations could arise other than tender, respectful and
loving, and all at once in the very early days they quarreled, so
that she said he did not care for her, that he cared for no one
but himself, burst into tears, and wrung her arms.

This first quarrel arose from Levin's having gone out to a new
farmhouse and having been away half an hour too long, because he
had tried to get home by a short cut and had lost his way.  He
drove home thinking of nothing but her, of her love, of his own
happiness, and the nearer he drew to home, the warmer was his
tenderness for her.  He ran into the room with the same feeling,
with an even stronger feeling than he had had when he reached the
Shtcherbatskys' house to make his offer.  And suddenly he was met
by a lowering expression he had never seen in her.  He would have
kissed her; she pushed him away.

"What is it?"

"You've been enjoying yourself," she began, trying to be calm and
spiteful.  But as soon as she opened her mouth, a stream of
reproach, of senseless jealousy, of all that had been torturing
her during that half hour which she had spent sitting motionless
at the window, burst from her.  It was only then, for the first
time, that he clearly understood what he had not understood when
he led her out of the church after the wedding.  He felt now that
he was not simply close to her, but that he did not know where he
ended and she began.  He felt this from the agonizing sensation
of division that he experienced at that instant.  He was offended
for the first instant, but the very same second he felt that he
could not be offended by her, that she was himself.  He felt for
the first moment as a man feels when, having suddenly received a
violent blow from behind, he turns round, angry and eager to
avenge himself, to look for his antagonist, and finds that it is
he himself who has accidentally struck himself, that there is no
one to be angry with, and that he must put up with and try to
soothe the pain.

Never afterwards did he feel it with such intensity, but this
first time he could not for a long while get over it.  His
natural feeling urged him to defend himself, to prove to her she
was wrong; but to prove her wrong would mean irritating her still
more and making the rupture greater that was the cause of all his
suffering.  One habitual feeling impelled him to get rid of the
blame and to pass it on to her.  Another feeling, even stronger,
impelled him as quickly as possible to smooth over the rupture
without letting it grow greater.  To remain under such undeserved
reproach was wretched, but to make her suffer by justifying
himself was worse still.  Like a man half-awake in an agony of
pain, he wanted to tear out, to fling away the aching place, and
coming to his senses, he felt that the aching place was himself.
He could do nothing but try to help the aching place to bear it,
and this he tried to do.

They made peace.  She, recognizing that she was wrong, though she
did not say so, became tenderer to him, and they experienced new,
redoubled happiness in their love.  But that did not prevent such
quarrels from happening again, and exceedingly often too, on the
most unexpected and trivial grounds.  These quarrels frequently
arose from the fact that they did not yet know what was of
importance to each other and that all this early period they were
both often in a bad temper.  When one was in a good temper, and
the other in a bad temper, the peace was not broken; but when
both happened to be in an ill-humor, quarrels sprang up from such
incomprehensibly trifling causes, that they could never remember
afterwards what they had quarreled about.  It is true that when
they were both in a good temper their enjoyment of life was
redoubled.  But still this first period of their married life was
a difficult time for them.

During all this early time they had a peculiarly vivid sense of
tension, as it were, a tugging in opposite directions of the
chain by which they were bound.  Altogether their honeymoon--that
is to say, the month after their wedding--from which from
tradition Levin expected so much, was not merely not a time of
sweetness, but remained in the memories of both as the bitterest
and most humiliating period in their lives.  They both alike
tried in later life to blot out from their memories all the
monstrous, shameful incidents of that morbid period, when both
were rarely in a normal frame of mind, both were rarely quite
themselves.

It was only in the third month of their married life, after their
return from Moscow, where they had been staying for a month, that
their life began to go more smoothly.



Chapter 15


They had just come back from Moscow, and were glad to be alone.
He was sitting at the writing table in his study, writing.  She,
wearing the dark lilac dress she had worn during the first days
of their married life, and put on again today, a dress
particularly remembered and loved by him, was sitting on the
sofa, the same old-fashioned leather sofa which had always stood
in the study in Levin's father's and grandfather's days.  She was
sewing at _broderie anglaise_.  He thought and wrote, never losing
the happy consciousness of her presence.  His work, both on the
land and on the book, in which the principles of the new land
system were to be laid down, had not been abandoned; but just as
formerly these pursuits and ideas had seemed to him petty and
trivial in comparison with the darkness that overspread all life,
now they seemed as unimportant and petty in comparison with the
life that lay before him suffused with the brilliant light of
happiness.  He went on with his work, but he felt now that the
center of gravity of his attention had passed to something else,
and that consequently he looked at his work quite differently and
more clearly.  Formerly this work had been for him an escape from
life.  Formerly he had felt that without this work his life would
be too gloomy.  Now these pursuits were necessary for him that
life might not be too uniformly bright.  Taking up his
manuscript, reading through what he had written, he found with
pleasure that the work was worth his working at.  Many of his old
ideas seemed to him superfluous and extreme, but many blanks
became distinct to him when he reviewed the whole thing in his
memory.  He was writing now a new chapter on the causes of the
present disastrous condition of agriculture in Russia.  He
maintained that the poverty of Russia arises not merely from the
anomalous distribution of landed property and misdirected
reforms, but that what had contributed of late years to this
result was the civilization from without abnormally grafted upon
Russia, especially facilities of communication, as railways,
leading to centralization in towns, the development of luxury,
and the consequent development of manufactures, credit and its
accompaniment of speculation--all to the detriment of
agriculture.  It seemed to him that in a normal development of
wealth in a state all these phenomena would arise only when a
considerable amount of labor had been put into agriculture, when
it had come under regular, or at least definite, conditions; that
the wealth of a country ought to increase proportionally, and
especially in such a way that other sources of wealth should not
outstrip agriculture; that in harmony with a certain stage of
agriculture there should be means of communication corresponding
to it, and that in our unsettled condition of the land, railways,
called into being by political and not by economic needs, were
premature, and instead of promoting agriculture, as was expected
of them, they were competing with agriculture and promoting the
development of manufactures and credit, and so arresting its
progress; and that just as the one-sided and premature
development of one organ in an animal would hinder its general
development, so in the general development of wealth in Russia,
credit, facilities of communication, manufacturing activity,
indubitably necessary in Europe, where they had arisen in their
proper time, had with us only done harm, by throwing into the
background the chief question calling for settlement--the
question of the organization of agriculture.

While he was writing his ideas she was thinking how unnaturally
cordial her husband had been to young Prince Tcharsky, who had,
with great want of tact, flirted with her the day before they
left Moscow.  "He's jealous," she thought.  "Goodness! how sweet
and silly he is!  He's jealous of me!  If he knew that I think no
more of them than of Piotr the cook," she thought, looking at his
head and red neck with a feeling of possession strange to
herself.  "Though it's a pity to take him from his work (but he
has plenty of time!), I must look at his face; will he feel I'm
looking at him?  I wish he'd turn round...I'll _will_ him to!"
and she opened her eyes wide, as though to intensify the
influence of her gaze.

"Yes, they draw away all the sap and give a false appearance of
prosperity," he muttered, stopping to write, and, feeling that
she was looking at him and smiling, he looked round.

"Well?" he queried, smiling, and getting up.

"He looked round," she thought.

"It's nothing; I wanted you to look round," she said, watching
him, and trying to guess whether he was vexed at being
interrupted or not.

"How happy we are alone together!--I am, that is," he said,
going up to her with a radiant smile of happiness.

"I'm just as happy.  I'll never go anywhere, especially not to
Moscow."

"And what were you thinking about?"

"I?  I was thinking....  No, no, go along, go on writing; don't
break off," she said, pursing up her lips, "and I must cut out
these little holes now, do you see?"

She took up her scissors and began cutting them out.

"No; tell me, what was it?" he said, sitting down beside her and
watching the tiny scissors moving round.

"Oh! what was I thinking about?  I was thinking about Moscow,
about the back of your head."

"Why should I, of all people, have such happiness!  It's
unnatural, too good," he said, kissing her hand.

"I feel quite the opposite; the better things are, the more
natural it seems to me."

"And you've got a little curl loose," he said, carefully turning
her head round.

"A little curl, oh yes.  No, no, we are busy at our work!"

Work did not progress further, and they darted apart from one
another like culprits when Kouzma came in to announce that tea
was ready.

"Have they come from the town?" Levin asked Kouzma.

"They've just come; they're unpacking the things."

"Come quickly," she said to him as she went out of the study, "or
else I shall read your letters without you."

Left alone, after putting his manuscripts together in the new
portfolio bought by her, he washed his hands at the new washstand
with the elegant fittings, that had all made their appearance
with her.  Levin smiled at his own thoughts, and shook his head
disapprovingly at those thoughts; a feeling akin to remorse
fretted him.  There was something shameful, effeminate, Capuan,
as he called it to himself, in his present mode of life.  "It's
not right to go on like this," he thought.  "It'll soon be three
months, and I'm doing next to nothing.  Today, almost for the
first time, I set to work seriously, and what happened?  I did
nothing but begin and throw it aside.  Even my ordinary pursuits
I have almost given up.  On the land I scarcely walk or drive
about at all to look after things.  Either I am loath to leave
her, or I see she's dull alone.  And I used to think that, before
marriage, life was nothing much, somehow didn't count, but that
after marriage, life began in earnest.  And here almost three
months have passed, and I have spent my time so idly and
unprofitably.  No, this won't do; I must begin.  Of course, it's
not her fault.  She's not to blame in any way.  I ought myself to
be firmer, to maintain my masculine independence of action; or
else I shall get into such ways, and she'll get used to them
too....  Of course she's not to blame," he told himself.

But it is hard for anyone who is dissatisfied not to blame
someone else, and especially the person nearest of all to him,
for the ground of his dissatisfaction.  And it vaguely came into
Levin's mind that she herself was not to blame (she could not be
to blame for anything), but what was to blame was her education,
too superficial and frivolous.  ("That fool Tcharsky: she wanted,
I know, to stop him, but didn't know how to.") "Yes, apart from
her interest in the house (that she has), apart from dress and
_broderie anglaise_, she has no serious interests.  No interest in
her work, in the estate, in the peasants, nor in music, though
she's rather good at it, nor in reading.  She does nothing, and
is perfectly satisfied." Levin, in his heart, censured this, and
did not as yet understand that she was preparing for that period
of activity which was to come for her when she would at once be
the wife of her husband and mistress of the house, and would
bear, and nurse, and bring up children.  He knew not that she was
instinctively aware of this, and preparing herself for this time
of terrible toil, did not reproach herself for the moments of
carelessness and happiness in her love that she enjoyed now while
gaily building her nest for the future.



Chapter 16


When Levin went upstairs, his wife was sitting near the new
silver samovar behind the new tea service, and, having settled
old Agafea Mihalovna at a little table with a full cup of tea,
was reading a letter from Dolly, with whom they were in continual
and frequent correspondence.

"You see, your good lady's settled me here, told me to sit a bit
with her," said Agafea Mihalovna, smiling affectionately at
Kitty.

In these words of Agafea Mihalovna, Levin read the final act of
the drama which had been enacted of late between her and Kitty.
He saw that, in spite of Agafea Mihalovna's feelings being hurt
by a new mistress taking the reins of government out of her
hands, Kitty had yet conquered her and made her love her.

"Here, I opened your letter too," said Kitty, handing him an
illiterate letter.  "It's from that woman, I think, your
brother's..." she said.  "I did not read it through.  This is
from my people and from Dolly.  Fancy!  Dolly took Tanya and
Grisha to a children's ball at the Sarmatskys': Tanya was a
French marquise."

But Levin did not hear her.  Flushing, he took the letter from
Marya Nikolaevna, his brother's former mistress, and began to
read it.  This was the second letter he had received from Marya
Nikolaevna.  In the first letter, Marya Nikolaevna wrote that his
brother had sent her away for no fault of hers, and, with
touching simplicity, added that though she was in want again, she
asked for nothing, and wished for nothing, but was only tormented
by the thought that Nikolay Dmitrievitch would come to grief
without her, owing to the weak state of his health, and begged
his brother to look after him.  Now she wrote quite differently.
She had found Nikolay Dmitrievitch, had again made it up with him
in Moscow, and had moved with him to a provincial town, where he
had received a post in the government service.  But that he had
quarreled with the head official, and was on his way back to
Moscow, only he had been taken so ill on the road that it was
doubtful if he would ever leave his bed again, she wrote.  "It's
always of you he has talked, and, besides, he has no more money
left."

"Read this; Dolly writes about you," Kitty was beginning, with a
smile; but she stopped suddenly, noticing the changed expression
on her husband's face.

"What is it?  What's the matter?"

"She writes to me that Nikolay, my brother, is at death's door.
I shall go to him."

Kitty's face changed at once.  Thoughts of Tanya as a marquise,
of Dolly, all had vanished.

"When are you going?" she said.

"Tomorrow."

"And I will go with you, can I?" she said.

"Kitty!  What are you thinking of?" he said reproachfully.

"How do you mean?" offended that he should seem to take her
suggestion unwillingly and with vexation.  "Why shouldn't I go?
I shan't be in your way.  I..."

"I'm going because my brother is dying," said Levin.  "Why should
you..."

"Why?  For the same reason as you."

"And, at a moment of such gravity for me, she only thinks of her
being dull by herself," thought Levin.  And this lack of candor
in a matter of such gravity infuriated him.

"It's out of the question," he said sternly.

Agafea Mihalovna, seeing that it was coming to a quarrel, gently
put down her cup and withdrew.  Kitty did not even notice her.
The tone in which her husband had said the last words wounded
her, especially because he evidently did not believe what she had
said.

"I tell you, that if you go, I shall come with you; I shall
certainly come," she said hastily and wrathfully.  "Why out of
the question?  Why do you say it's out of the question?"

"Because it'll be going God knows where, by all sorts of roads
and to all sorts of hotels.  You would be a hindrance to me,"
said Levin, trying to be cool.

"Not at all.  I don't want anything.  Where you can go, I
can...."

"Well, for one thing then, because this woman's there whom you
can't meet."

"I don't know and don't care to know who's there and what.  I
know that my husband's brother is dying and my husband is going
to him, and I go with my husband too...."

"Kitty!  Don't get angry.  But just think a little: this is a
matter of such importance that I can't bear to think that you
should bring in a feeling of weakness, of dislike to being left
alone.  Come, you'll be dull alone, so go and stay at Moscow a
little."

"There, you always ascribe base, vile motives to me," she said
with tears of wounded pride and fury.  "I didn't mean, it wasn't
weakness, it wasn't...I feel that it's my duty to be with my
husband when he's in trouble, but you try on purpose to hurt me,
you try on purpose not to understand...."

"No; this is awful!  To be such a slave!" cried Levin, getting
up, and unable to restrain his anger any longer.  But at the same
second he felt that he was beating himself.

"Then why did you marry?  You could have been free.  Why did you,
if you regret it?" she said, getting up and running away into the
drawing room.

When he went to her, she was sobbing.

He began to speak, trying to find words not to dissuade but
simply to soothe her.  But she did not heed him, and would not
agree to anything.  He bent down to her and took her hand, which
resisted him.  He kissed her hand, kissed her hair, kissed her
hand again--still she was silent.  But when he took her face in
both his hands and said "Kitty!" she suddenly recovered herself,
and began to cry, and they were reconciled.

It was decided that they should go together the next day.  Levin
told his wife that he believed she wanted to go simply in order
to be of use, agreed that Marya Nikolaevna's being with his
brother did not make her going improper, but he set off at the
bottom of his heart dissatisfied both with her and with himself.
He was dissatisfied with her for being unable to make up her mind
to let him go when it was necessary (and how strange it was for
him to think that he, so lately hardly daring to believe in such
happiness as that she could love him--now was unhappy because she
loved him too much!), and he was dissatisfied with himself for
not showing more strength of will.  Even greater was the feeling
of disagreement at the bottom of his heart as to her not needing
to consider the woman who was with his brother, and he thought
with horror of all the contingencies they might meet with.  The
mere idea of his wife, his Kitty, being in the same room with a
common wench, set him shuddering with horror and loathing.



Chapter 17


The hotel of the provincial town where Nikolay Levin was lying
ill was one of those provincial hotels which are constructed on
the newest model of modern improvements, with the best intentions
of cleanliness, comfort, and even elegance, but owing to the
public that patronizes them, are with astounding rapidity
transformed into filthy taverns with a pretension of modern
improvement that only makes them worse than the old-fashioned,
honestly filthy hotels.  This hotel had already reached that
stage, and the soldier in a filthy uniform smoking in the entry,
supposed to stand for a hall-porter, and the cast-iron, slippery,
dark, and disagreeable staircase, and the free and easy waiter in
a filthy frock coat, and the common dining room with a dusty
bouquet of wax flowers adorning the table, and filth, dust, and
disorder everywhere, and at the same time the sort of modern
up-to-date self-complacent railway uneasiness of this hotel,
aroused a most painful feeling in Levin after their fresh young
life, especially because the impression of falsity made by the
hotel was so out of keeping with what awaited them.

As is invariably the case, after they had been asked at what
price they wanted rooms, it appeared that there was not one
decent room for them; one decent room had been taken by the
inspector of railroads, another by a lawyer from Moscow, a third
by Princess Astafieva from the country.  There remained only one
filthy room, next to which they promised that another should be
empty by the evening.  Feeling angry with his wife because what
he had expected had come to pass, which was that at the moment of
arrival, when his heart throbbed with emotion and anxiety to know
how his brother was getting on, he should have to be seeing after
her, instead of rushing straight to his brother, Levin conducted
her to the room assigned them.

"Go, do go!" she said, looking at him with timid and guilty eyes.

He went out of the door without a word, and at once stumbled over
Marya Nikolaevna, who had heard of his arrival and had not dared
to go in to see him.  She was just the same as when he saw her in
Moscow; the same woolen gown, and bare arms and neck, and the
same good-naturedly stupid, pockmarked face, only a little
plumper.

"Well, how is he? how is he?"

"Very bad.  He can't get up.  He has kept expecting you.  He....
Are you...with your wife?"

Levin did not for the first moment understand what it was
confused her, but she immediately enlightened him.

"I'll go away.  I'll go down to the kitchen," she brought out.
"Nikolay Dmitrievitch will be delighted.  He heard about it, and
knows your lady, and remembers her abroad."

Levin realized that she meant his wife, and did not know what
answer to make.

"Come along, come along to him!" he said.

But as soon as he moved, the door of his room opened and Kitty
peeped out.  Levin crimsoned both from shame and anger with his
wife, who had put herself and him in such a difficult position;
but Marya Nikolaevna crimsoned still more.  She positively shrank
together and flushed to the point of tears, and clutching the
ends of her apron in both hands, twisted them in her red fingers
without knowing what to say and what to do.

For the first instant Levin saw an expression of eager curiosity
in the eyes with which Kitty looked at this awful woman, so
incomprehensible to her; but it lasted only a single instant.

"Well! how is he?" she turned to her husband and then to her.

"But one can't go on talking in the passage like this!" Levin
said, looking angrily at a gentleman who walked jauntily at that
instant across the corridor, as though about his affairs.

"Well then, come in," said Kitty, turning to Marya Nikolaevna,
who had recovered herself, but noticing her husband's face of
dismay, "or go on; go, and then come for me," she said, and went
back into the room.

Levin went to his brother's room.  He had not in the least
expected what he saw and felt in his brother's room.  He had
expected to find him in the same state of self-deception which he
had heard was so frequent with the consumptive, and which had
struck him so much during his brother's visit in the autumn.  He
had expected to find the physical signs of the approach of death
more marked--greater weakness, greater emaciation, but still
almost the same condition of things.  He had expected himself to
feel the same distress at the loss of the brother he loved and
the same horror in face of death as he had felt then, only in a
greater degree.  And he had prepared himself for this; but he
found something utterly different.

In a little dirty room with the painted panels of its walls
filthy with spittle, and conversation audible through the thin
partition from the next room, in a stifling atmosphere saturated
with impurities, on a bedstead moved away from the wall, there
lay covered with a quilt, a body.  One arm of this body was above
the quilt, and the wrist, huge as a rake-handle, was attached,
inconceivably it seemed, to the thin, long bone of the arm smooth
from the beginning to the middle.  The head lay sideways on the
pillow.  Levin could see the scanty locks wet with sweat on the
temples and tense, transparent-looking forehead.

"It cannot be that that fearful body was my brother Nikolay?"
thought Levin.  But he went closer, saw the face, and doubt
became impossible.  In spite of the terrible change in the face,
Levin had only to glance at those eager eyes raised at his
approach, only to catch the faint movement of the mouth under the
sticky mustache, to realize the terrible truth that this
death-like body was his living brother.

The glittering eyes looked sternly and reproachfully at his
brother as he drew near.  And immediately this glance established
a living relationship between living men.  Levin immediately felt
the reproach in the eyes fixed on him, and felt remorse at his
own happiness.

When Konstantin took him by the hand, Nikolay smiled.  The smile
was faint, scarcely perceptible, and in spite of the smile the
stern expression of the eyes was unchanged.

"You did not expect to find me like this," he articulated with
effort.

"Yes...no," said Levin, hesitating over his words.  "How was
it you didn't let me know before, that is, at the time of my
wedding?  I made inquiries in all directions."

He had to talk so as not to be silent, and he did not know what
to say, especially as his brother made no reply, and simply
stared without dropping his eyes, and evidently penetrated to the
inner meaning of each word.  Levin told his brother that his wife
had come with him.  Nikolay expressed pleasure, but said he was
afraid of frightening her by his condition.  A silence followed.
Suddenly Nikolay stirred, and began to say something.  Levin
expected something of peculiar gravity and importance from the
expression of his face, but Nikolay began speaking of his health.
He found fault with the doctor, regretting he had not a
celebrated Moscow doctor.  Levin saw that he still hoped.

Seizing the first moment of silence, Levin got up, anxious to
escape, if only for an instant, from his agonizing emotion, and
said that he would go and fetch his wife.

"Very well, and I'll tell her to tidy up here.  It's dirty and
stinking here, I expect.  Marya! clear up the room," the sick
man said with effort.  "Oh, and when you've cleared up, go away
yourself," he added, looking inquiringly at his brother.

Levin made no answer.  Going out into the corridor, he stopped
short.  He had said he would fetch his wife, but now, taking
stock of the emotion he was feeling, he decided that he would try
on the contrary to persuade her not to go in to the sick man.
"Why should she suffer as I am suffering?" he thought.

"Well, how is he?" Kitty asked with a frightened face.

"Oh, it's awful, it's awful!  What did you come for?" said Levin.

Kitty was silent for a few seconds, looking timidly and ruefully
at her husband; then she went up and took him by the elbow with
both hands.

"Kostya! take me to him; it will be easier for us to bear it
together.  You only take me, take me to him, please, and go
away," she said.  "You must understand that for me to see you,
and not to see him, is far more painful.  There I might be a help
to you and to him.  Please, let me!" she besought her husband, as
though the happiness of her life depended on it.

Levin was obliged to agree, and regaining his composure, and
completely forgetting about Marya Nikolaevna by now, he went
again in to his brother with Kitty.

Stepping lightly, and continually glancing at her husband,
showing him a valorous and sympathetic face, Kitty went into the
sick-room, and, turning without haste, noiselessly closed the
door.  With inaudible steps she went quickly to the sick man's
bedside, and going up so that he had not to turn his head, she
immediately clasped in her fresh young hand the skeleton of his
huge hand, pressed it, and began speaking with that soft
eagerness, sympathetic and not jarring, which is peculiar to
women.

"We have met, though we were not acquainted, at Soden," she said.
"You never thought I was to be your sister?"

"You would not have recognized me?" he said, with a radiant smile
at her entrance.

"Yes, I should.  What a good thing you let us know!  Not a day
has passed that Kostya has not mentioned you, and been anxious."

But the sick man's interest did not last long.

Before she had finished speaking, there had come back into his
face the stern, reproachful expression of the dying man's envy of
the living.

"I am afraid you are not quite comfortable here," she said,
turning away from his fixed stare, and looking about the room.
"We must ask about another room," she said to her husband, "so
that we might be nearer."



Chapter 18


Levin could not look calmly at his brother; he could not himself
be natural and calm in his presence.  When he went in to the sick
man, his eyes and his attention were unconsciously dimmed, and he
did not see and did not distinguish the details of his brother's
position.  He smelt the awful odor, saw the dirt, disorder, and
miserable condition, and heard the groans, and felt that nothing
could be done to help.  It never entered his head to analyze the
details of the sick man's situation, to consider how that body
was lying under the quilt, how those emaciated legs and thighs
and spine were lying huddled up, and whether they could not be
made more comfortable, whether anything could not be done to make
things, if not better, at least less bad.  It made his blood run
cold when he began to think of all these details.  He was
absolutely convinced that nothing could be done to prolong his
brother's life or to relieve his suffering.  But a sense of his
regarding all aid as out of the question was felt by the sick
man, and exasperated him.  And this made it still more painful
for Levin.  To be in the sick-room was agony to him, not to be
there still worse.  And he was continually, on various pretexts,
going out of the room, and coming in again, because he was unable
to remain alone.

But Kitty thought, and felt, and acted quite differently.  On
seeing the sick man, she pitied him.  And pity in her womanly
heart did not arouse at all that feeling of horror and loathing
that it aroused in her husband, but a desire to act, to find out
all the details of his state, and to remedy them.  And since she
had not the slightest doubt that it was her duty to help him, she
had no doubt either that it was possible, and immediately set to
work.  The very details, the mere thought of which reduced her
husband to terror, immediately engaged her attention.  She sent
for the doctor, sent to the chemist's, set the maid who had come
with her and Marya Nikolaevna to sweep and dust and scrub; she
herself washed up something, washed out something else, laid
something under the quilt.  Something was by her directions
brought into the sick-room, something else was carried out.  She
herself went several times to her room, regardless of the men she
met in the corridor, got out and brought in sheets, pillow cases,
towels, and shirts.

The waiter, who was busy with a party of engineers dining in the
dining hall, came several times with an irate countenance in
answer to her summons, and could not avoid carrying out her
orders, as she gave them with such gracious insistence that there
was no evading her.  Levin did not approve of all this; he did
not believe it would be of any good to the patient.  Above all,
he feared the patient would be angry at it.  But the sick man,
though he seemed and was indifferent about it, was not angry, but
only abashed, and on the whole as it were interested in what she
was doing with him.  Coming back from the doctor to whom Kitty
had sent him, Levin, on opening the door, came upon the sick man
at the instant when, by Kitty's directions, they were changing
his linen.  The long white ridge of his spine, with the huge,
prominent shoulder blades and jutting ribs and vertebrae, was
bare, and Marya Nikolaevna and the waiter were struggling with
the sleeve of the night shirt, and could not get the long, limp
arm into it.  Kitty, hurriedly closing the door after Levin, was
not looking that way; but the sick man groaned, and she moved
rapidly towards him.

"Make haste," she said.

"Oh, don't you come," said the sick man angrily.  "I'll do it my
myself...."

"What say?" queried Marya Nikolaevna.  But Kitty heard and saw he
was ashamed and uncomfortable at being naked before her.

"I'm not looking, I'm not looking!" she said, putting the arm in.
"Marya Nikolaevna, you come this side, you do it," she added.

"Please go for me, there's a little bottle in my small bag," she
said, turning to her husband, "you know, in the side pocket;
bring it, please, and meanwhile they'll finish clearing up here."

Returning with the bottle, Levin found the sick man settled
comfortably and everything about him completely changed.  The
heavy smell was replaced by the smell of aromatic vinegar, which
Kitty with pouting lips and puffed-out, rosy cheeks was squirting
through a little pipe.  There was no dust visible anywhere, a rug
was laid by the bedside.  On the table stood medicine bottles and
decanters tidily arranged, and the linen needed was folded up
there, and Kitty's _broderie anglaise_.  On the other table by the
patient's bed there were candles and drink and powders.  The sick
man himself, washed and combed, lay in clean sheets on high
raised pillows, in a clean night-shirt with a white collar about
his astoundingly thin neck, and with a new expression of hope
looked fixedly at Kitty.

The doctor brought by Levin, and found by him at the club, was
not the one who had been attending Nikolay Levin, as the patient
was dissatisfied with him.  The new doctor took up a stethoscope
and sounded the patient, shook his head, prescribed medicine, and
with extreme minuteness explained first how to take the medicine
and then what diet was to be kept to.  He advised eggs, raw or
hardly cooked, and seltzer water, with warm milk at a certain
temperature.  When the doctor had gone away the sick man said
something to his brother, of which Levin could distinguish only
the last words: "Your Katya." By the expression with which he
gazed at her, Levin saw that he was praising her.  He called
indeed to Katya, as he called her.

"I'm much better already," he said.  "Why, with you I should have
got well long ago.  How nice it is!" he took her hand and drew it
towards his lips, but as though afraid she would dislike it he
changed his mind, let it go, and only stroked it.  Kitty took his
hand in both hers and pressed it.

"Now turn me over on the left side and go to bed," he said.

No one could make out what he said but Kitty; she alone
understood.  She understood because she was all the while
mentally keeping watch on what he needed.

"On the other side," she said to her husband, "he always sleeps
on that side.  Turn him over, it's so disagreeable calling the
servants.  I'm not strong enough.  Can you?" she said to Marya
Nikolaevna.

"I'm afraid not," answered Marya Nikolaevna.

Terrible as it was to Levin to put his arms round that terrible
body, to take hold of that under the quilt, of which he preferred
to know nothing, under his wife's influence he made his resolute
face that she knew so well, and putting his arms into the bed
took hold of the body, but in spite of his own strength he was
struck by the strange heaviness of those powerless limbs.  While
he was turning him over, conscious of the huge emaciated arm
about his neck, Kitty swiftly and noiselessly turned the pillow,
beat it up and settled in it the sick man's head, smoothing back
his hair, which was sticking again to his moist brow.

The sick man kept his brother's hand in his own.  Levin felt that
he meant to do something with his hand and was pulling it
somewhere.  Levin yielded with a sinking heart: yes, he drew it
to his mouth and kissed it.  Levin, shaking with sobs and unable
to articulate a word, went out of the room.



Chapter 19


"Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast
revealed them unto babes."  So Levin thought about his wife as he
talked to her that evening.

Levin thought of the text, not because he considered himself
"wise and prudent."  He did not so consider himself, but he could
not help knowing that he had more intellect than his wife and
Agafea Mihalovna, and he could not help knowing that when he
thought of death, he thought with all the force of his intellect.
He knew too that the brains of many great men, whose thoughts he
had read, had brooded over death and yet knew not a hundredth
part of what his wife and Agafea Mihalovna knew about it.
Different as those two women were, Agafea Mihalovna and Katya, as
his brother Nikolay had called her, and as Levin particularly
liked to call her now, they were quite alike in this.  Both knew,
without a shade of doubt, what sort of thing life was and what
was death, and though neither of them could have answered, and
would even not have understood the questions that presented
themselves to Levin, both had no doubt of the significance of
this event, and were precisely alike in their way of looking at
it, which they shared with millions of people.  The proof that
they knew for a certainty the nature of death lay in the fact
that they knew without a second of hesitation how to deal with
the dying, and were not frightened of them.  Levin and other men
like him, though they could have said a great deal about death,
obviously did not know this since they were afraid of death, and
were absolutely at a loss what to do when people were dying.  If
Levin had been alone now with his brother Nikolay, he would have
looked at him with terror, and with still greater terror waited,
and would not have known what else to do.

More than that, he did not know what to say, how to look, how to
move.  To talk of outside things seemed to him shocking,
impossible, to talk of death and depressing subjects--also
impossible.  To be silent, also impossible.  "If I look at him he
will think I am studying him, I am afraid; if I don't look at
him, he'll think I'm thinking of other things.  If I walk on
tiptoe, he will be vexed; to tread firmly, I'm ashamed."  Kitty
evidently did not think of herself, and had no time to think
about herself: she was thinking about him because she knew
something, and all went well.  She told him about herself even
and about her wedding, and smiled and sympathized with him and
petted him, and talked of cases of recovery and all went well; so
then she must know.  The proof that her behavior and Agafea
Mihalovna's was not instinctive, animal, irrational, was that
apart from the physical treatment, the relief of suffering, both
Agafea Mihalovna and Kitty required for the dying man something
else more important than the physical treatment, and something
which had nothing in common with physical conditions.  Agafea
Mihalovna, speaking of the man just dead, had said: "Well, thank
God, he took the sacrament and received absolution; God grant
each one of us such a death."  Katya in just the same way,
besides all her care about linen, bedsores, drink, found time the
very first day to persuade the sick man of the necessity of
taking the sacrament and receiving absolution.

On getting back from the sick-room to their own two rooms for the
night, Levin sat with hanging head not knowing what to do.  Not
to speak of supper, of preparing for bed, of considering what
they were going to do, he could not even talk to his wife; he was
ashamed to.  Kitty, on the contrary, was more active than usual.
She was even livelier than usual.  She ordered supper to be
brought, herself unpacked their things, and herself helped to
make the beds, and did not even forget to sprinkle them with
Persian powder.  She showed that alertness, that swiftness of
reflection comes out in men before a battle, in conflict, in the
dangerous and decisive moments of life--those moments when a man
shows once and for all his value, and that all his past has not
been wasted but has been a preparation for these moments.

Everything went rapidly in her hands, and before it was twelve
o'clock all their things were arranged cleanly and tidily in her
rooms, in such a way that the hotel rooms seemed like home: the
beds were made, brushes, combs, looking-glasses were put out,
table napkins were spread.

Levin felt that it was unpardonable to eat, to sleep, to talk
even now, and it seemed to him that every movement he made was
unseemly.  She arranged the brushes, but she did it all so that
there was nothing shocking in it.

They could neither of them eat, however, and for a long while
they could not sleep, and did not even go to bed.

"I am very glad I persuaded him to receive extreme unction
tomorrow," she said, sitting in her dressing jacket before her
folding looking glass, combing her soft, fragrant hair with a
fine comb.  "I have never seen it, but I know, mamma has told me,
there are prayers said for recovery."

"Do you suppose he can possibly recover?" said Levin, watching a
slender tress at the back of her round little head that was
continually hidden when she passed the comb through the front.

"I asked the doctor; he said he couldn't live more than three
days.  But can they be sure?  I'm very glad, anyway, that I
persuaded him," she said, looking askance at her husband through
her hair.  "Anything is possible," she added with that peculiar,
rather sly expression that was always in her face when she spoke
of religion.

Since their conversation about religion when they were engaged
neither of them had ever started a discussion of the subject, but
she performed all the ceremonies of going to church, saying her
prayers, and so on, always with the unvarying conviction that
this ought to be so.  In spite of his assertion to the contrary,
she was firmly persuaded that he was as much a Christian as she,
and indeed a far better one; and all that he said about it was
simply one of his absurd masculine freaks, just as he would say
about her _broderie anglaise_ that good people patch holes, but
that she cut them on purpose, and so on.

"Yes, you see this woman, Marya Nikolaevna, did not know how to
manage all this," said Levin.  "And...I must own I'm very,
very glad you came.  You are such purity that...."  He took her
hand and did not kiss it (to kiss her hand in such closeness to
death seemed to him improper); he merely squeezed it with a
penitent air, looking at her brightening eyes.

"It would have been miserable for you to be alone," she said, and
lifting her hands which hid her cheeks flushing with pleasure,
twisted her coil of hair on the nape of her neck and pinned it
there.  "No," she went on, "she did not know how....  Luckily, I
learned a lot at Soden."

"Surely there are not people there so ill?"

"Worse."

"What's so awful to me is that I can't see him as he was when he
was young.  You would not believe how charming he was as a youth,
but I did not understand him then."

"I can quite, quite believe it.  How I feel that we might have
been friends!" she said; and, distressed at what she had said,
she looked round at her husband, and tears came into her eyes.

"Yes, _might have been_," he said mournfully.  "He's just one of
those people of whom they say they're not for this world."

"But we have many days before us; we must go to bed," said Kitty,
glancing at her tiny watch.



Chapter 20


The next day the sick man received the sacrament and extreme
unction.  During the ceremony Nikolay Levin prayed fervently.
His great eyes, fastened on the holy image that was set out on a
card table covered with a colored napkin, expressed such
passionate prayer and hope that it was awful to Levin to see it.
Levin knew that this passionate prayer and hope would only make
him feel more bitterly parting from the life he so loved.  Levin
knew his brother and the workings of his intellect: he knew that
his unbelief came not from life being easier for him without
faith, but had grown up because step by step the contemporary
scientific interpretation of natural phenomena crushed out the
possibility of faith; and so he knew that his present return was
not a legitimate one, brought about by way of the same working of
his intellect, but simply a temporary, interested return to faith
in a desperate hope of recovery.  Levin knew too that Kitty had
strengthened his hope by accounts of the marvelous recoveries she
had heard of.  Levin knew all this; and it was agonizingly
painful to him to behold the supplicating, hopeful eyes and the
emaciated wrist, lifted with difficulty, making the sign of the
cross on the tense brow, and the prominent shoulders and hollow,
gasping chest, which one could not feel consistent with the life
the sick man was praying for.  During the sacrament Levin did
what he, an unbeliever, had done a thousand times.  He said,
addressing God, "If Thou dost exist, make this man to recover"
(of course this same thing has been repeated many times), "and
Thou wilt save him and me."

After extreme unction the sick man became suddenly much better.
He did not cough once in the course of an hour, smiled, kissed
Kitty's hand, thanking her with tears, and said he was
comfortable, free from pain, and that he felt strong and had an
appetite.  He even raised himself when his soup was brought, and
asked for a cutlet as well.  Hopelessly ill as he was, obvious as
it was at the first glance that he could not recover, Levin and
Kitty were for that hour both in the same state of excitement,
happy, though fearful of being mistaken.

"Is he better?"

"Yes, much."

"It's wonderful."

"There's nothing wonderful in it."

"Anyway, he's better," they said in a whisper, smiling to one
another.

This self-deception was not of long duration.  The sick man fell
into a quiet sleep, but he was waked up half an hour later by his
cough.  And all at once every hope vanished in those about him
and in himself.  The reality of his suffering crushed all hopes
in Levin and Kitty and in the sick man himself, leaving no doubt,
no memory even of past hopes.

Without referring to what he had believed in half an hour before,
as though ashamed even to recall it, he asked for iodine to
inhale in a bottle covered with perforated paper.  Levin gave him
the bottle, and the same look of passionate hope with which he
had taken the sacrament was now fastened on his brother,
demanding from him the confirmation of the doctor's words that
inhaling iodine worked wonders.

"Is Katya not here?" he gasped, looking round while Levin
reluctantly assented to the doctor's words.  "No; so I can say
it....  It was for her sake I went through that farce.  She's so
sweet; but you and I can't deceive ourselves.  This is what I
believe in," he said, and, squeezing the bottle in his bony hand,
he began breathing over it.

At eight o'clock in the evening Levin and his wife were drinking
tea in their room when Marya Nikolaevna ran in to them
breathlessly.  She was pale, and her lips were quivering.  "He is
dying!" she whispered.  "I'm afraid will die this minute."

Both of them ran to him.  He was sitting raised up with one elbow
on the bed, his long back bent, and his head hanging low.

"How do you feel?" Levin asked in a whisper, after a silence.

"I feel I'm setting off," Nikolay said with difficulty, but with
extreme distinctness, screwing the words out of himself.  He did
not raise his head, but simply turned his eyes upwards, without
their reaching his brother's face.  "Katya, go away!" he added.

Levin jumped up, and with a peremptory whisper made her go out.

"I'm setting off," he said again.

"Why do you think so?" said Levin, so as to say something.

"Because I'm setting off," he repeated, as though he had a liking
for the phrase.  "It's the end."

Marya Nikolaevna went up to him.

"You had better lie down; you'd be easier," she said.

"I shall lie down soon enough," he pronounced slowly, "when I'm
dead," he said sarcastically, wrathfully.  "Well, you can lay me
down if you like."

Levin laid his brother on his back, sat down beside him, and
gazed at his face, holding his breath.  The dying man lay with
closed eyes, but the muscles twitched from time to time on his
forehead, as with one thinking deeply and intensely.  Levin
involuntarily thought with him of what it was that was happening
to him now, but in spite of all his mental efforts to go along
with him he saw by the expression of that calm, stern face that
for the dying man all was growing clearer and clearer that was
still as dark as ever for Levin.

"Yes, yes, so," the dying man articulated slowly at intervals.
"Wait a little." He was silent.  "Right!" he pronounced all at
once reassuringly, as though all were solved for him.  "O Lord!"
he murmured, and sighed deeply.

Marya Nikolaevna felt his feet.  "They're getting cold," she
whispered.

For a long while, a very long while it seemed to Levin, the sick
man lay motionless.  But he was still alive, and from time to
time he sighed.  Levin by now was exhausted from mental strain.
He felt that, with no mental effort, could he understand what it
was that was _right_.  He could not even think of the problem of
death itself, but with no will of his own thoughts kept coming to
him of what he had to do next; closing the dead man's eyes,
dressing him, ordering the coffin.  And, strange to say, he felt
utterly cold, and was not conscious of sorrow nor of loss, less
still of pity for his brother.  If he had any feeling for his
brother at that moment, it was envy for the knowledge the dying
man had now that he could not have.

A long time more he sat over him so, continually expecting the
end.  But the end did not come.  The door opened and Kitty
appeared.  Levin got up to stop her.  But at the moment he was
getting up, he caught the sound of the dying man stirring.

"Don't go away," said Nikolay and held out his hand.  Levin gave
him his, and angrily waved to his wife to go away.

With the dying man's hand in his hand, he sat for half an hour,
an hour, another hour.  He did not think of death at all now.  He
wondered what Kitty was doing; who lived in the next room;
whether the doctor lived in a house of his own.  He longed for
food and for sleep.  He cautiously drew away his hand and felt
the feet.  The feet were cold, but the sick man was still
breathing.  Levin tried again to move away on tiptoe, but the
sick man stirred again and said: "Don't go."

         * * * * * * * *

The dawn came; the sick man's condition was unchanged.  Levin
stealthily withdrew his hand, and without looking at the dying
man, went off to his own room and went to sleep.  When he woke
up, instead of news of his brother's death which he expected, he
learned that the sick man had returned to his earlier condition.
He had begun sitting up again, coughing, had begun eating again,
talking again, and again had ceased to talk of death, again had
begun to express hope of his recovery, and had become more
irritable and more gloomy than ever.  No one, neither his brother
nor Kitty, could soothe him.  He was angry with everyone, and
said nasty things to everyone, reproached everyone for his
sufferings, and insisted that they should get him a celebrated
doctor from Moscow.  To all inquiries made him as to how he felt,
he made the same answer with an expression of vindictive
reproachfulness, "I'm suffering horribly, intolerably!"

The sick man was suffering more and more, especially from
bedsores, which it was impossible now to remedy, and grew more
and more angry with everyone about him, blaming them for
everything, and especially for not having brought him a doctor
from Moscow.  Kitty tried in every possible way to relieve him,
to soothe him; but it was all in vain, and Levin saw that she
herself was exhausted both physically and morally, though she
would not admit it.  The sense of death, which had been evoked in
all by his taking leave of life on the night when he had sent for
his brother, was broken up.  Everyone knew that he must
inevitably die soon, that he was half dead already.  Everyone
wished for nothing but that he should die as soon as possible,
and everyone, concealing this, gave him medicines, tried to find
remedies and doctors, and deceived him and themselves and each
other.  All this was falsehood, disgusting, irreverent deceit.
And owing to the bent of his character, and because he loved the
dying man more than anyone else did, Levin was most painfully
conscious of this deceit.

Levin, who had long been possessed by the idea of reconciling his
brothers, at least in face of death, had written to his brother,
Sergey Ivanovitch, and having received an answer from him, he
read this letter to the sick man.  Sergey Ivanovitch wrote that
he could not come himself, and in touching terms he begged his
brother's forgiveness.

The sick man said nothing.

"What am I to write to him?" said Levin.  "I hope you are not
angry with him?"

"No, not the least!" Nikolay answered, vexed at the question.
"Tell him to send me a doctor."

Three more days of agony followed; the sick man was still in the
same condition.  The sense of longing for his death was felt by
everyone now at the mere sight of him, by the waiters and the
hotel-keeper and all the people staying in the hotel, and the
doctor and Marya Nikolaevna and Levin and Kitty.  The sick man
alone did not express this feeling, but on the contrary was
furious at their not getting him doctors, and went on taking
medicine and talking of life.  Only at rare moments, when the
opium gave him an instant's relief from the never-ceasing pain,
he would sometimes, half asleep, utter what was ever more intense
in his heart than in all the others: "Oh, if it were only the
end!" or: "When will it be over?"

His sufferings, steadily growing more intense, did their work and
prepared him for death.  There was no position in which he was
not in pain, there was not a minute in which he was unconscious
of it, not a limb, not a part of his body that did not ache and
cause him agony.  Even the memories, the impressions, the
thoughts of this body awakened in him now the same aversion as
the body itself.  The sight of other people, their remarks, his
own reminiscences, everything was for him a source of agony.
Those about him felt this, and instinctively did not allow
themselves to move freely, to talk, to express their wishes
before him.  All his life was merged in the one feeling of
suffering and desire to be rid of it.

There was evidently coming over him that revulsion that would
make him look upon death as the goal of his desires, as
happiness.  Hitherto each individual desire, aroused by suffering
or privation, such as hunger, fatigue, thirst, had been satisfied
by some bodily function giving pleasure.  But now no physical
craving or suffering received relief, and the effort to relieve
them only caused fresh suffering.  And so all desires were merged
in one--the desire to be rid of all his sufferings and their
source, the body.  But he had no words to express this desire of
deliverance, and so he did not speak of it, and from habit asked
for the satisfaction of desires which could not now be satisfied.
"Turn me over on the other side," he would say, and immediately
after he would ask to be turned back again as before.  "Give me
some broth.  Take away the broth.  Talk of something: why are you
silent?" And directly they began to talk he would close his eyes,
and would show weariness, indifference, and loathing.

On the tenth day from their arrival at the town, Kitty was
unwell.  She suffered from headache and sickness, and she could
not get up all the morning.

The doctor opined that the indisposition arose from fatigue and
excitement, and prescribed rest.

After dinner, however, Kitty got up and went as usual with her
work to the sick man.  He looked at her sternly when she came in,
and smiled contemptuously when she said she had been unwell.
That day he was continually blowing his nose, and groaning
piteously.

"How do you feel?" she asked him.

"Worse," he articulated with difficulty.  "In pain!"

"In pain, where?"

"Everywhere."

"It will be over today, you will see," said Marya Nikolaevna.
Though it was said in a whisper, the sick man, whose hearing
Levin had noticed was very keen, must have heard.  Levin said
hush to her, and looked round at the sick man.  Nikolay had
heard; but these words produced no effect on him.  His eyes had
still the same intense, reproachful look.

"Why do you think so?" Levin asked her, when she had followed him
into the corridor.

"He has begun picking at himself," said Marya Nikolaevna.

"How do you mean?"

"Like this," she said, tugging at the folds of her woolen skirt.
Levin noticed, indeed, that all that day the patient pulled at
himself, as it were, trying to snatch something away.

Marya Nikolaevna's prediction came true.  Towards night the sick
man was not able to lift his hands, and could only gaze before
him with the same intensely concentrated expression in his eyes.
Even when his brother or Kitty bent over him, so that he could
see them, he looked just the same.  Kitty sent for the priest to
read the prayer for the dying.

While the priest was reading it, the dying man did not show any
sign of life; his eyes were closed.  Levin, Kitty, and Marya
Nikolaevna stood at the bedside.  The priest had not quite
finished reading the prayer when the dying man stretched, sighed,
and opened his eyes.  The priest, on finishing the prayer, put
the cross to the cold forehead, then slowly returned it to the
stand, and after standing for two minutes more in silence, he
touched the huge, bloodless hand that was turning cold.

"He is gone," said the priest, and would have moved away; but
suddenly there was a faint stir in the mustaches of the dead man
that seemed glued together, and quite distinctly in the hush they
heard from the bottom of the chest the sharply defined sounds:

"Not quite...soon."

And a minute later the face brightened, a smile came out under
the mustaches, and the women who had gathered round began
carefully laying out the corpse.

The sight of his brother, and the nearness of death, revived in
Levin that sense of horror in face of the insoluble enigma,
together with the nearness and inevitability of death, that had
come upon him that autumn evening when his brother had come to
him.  This feeling was now even stronger than before; even less
than before did he feel capable of apprehending the meaning of
death, and its inevitability rose up before him more terrible
than ever.  But now, thanks to his wife's presence, that feeling
did not reduce him to despair.  In spite of death, he felt the
need of life and love.  He felt that love saved him from despair,
and that this love, under the menace of despair, had become still
stronger and purer.  The one mystery of death, still unsolved,
had scarcely passed before his eyes, when another mystery had
arisen, as insoluble, urging him to love and to life.

The doctor confirmed his suppositions in regard to Kitty.  Her
indisposition was a symptom that she was with child.



Chapter 21


From the moment when Alexey Alexandrovitch understood from his
interviews with Betsy and with Stepan Arkadyevitch that all that
was expected of him was to leave his wife in peace, without
burdening her with his presence, and that his wife herself
desired this, he felt so distraught that he could come to no
decision of himself; he did not know himself what he wanted now,
and putting himself in the hands of those who were so pleased to
interest themselves in his affairs, he met everything with
unqualified assent.  It was only when Anna had left his house,
and the English governess sent to ask him whether she should dine
with him or separately, that for the first time he clearly
comprehended his position, and was appalled by it.  Most
difficult of all in this position was the fact that he could not
in any way connect and reconcile his past with what was now.  It
was not the past when he had lived happily with his wife that
troubled him.  The transition from that past to a knowledge of
his wife's unfaithfulness he had lived through miserably already;
that state was painful, but he could understand it.  If his wife
had then, on declaring to him her unfaithfulness, left him, he
would have been wounded, unhappy, but he would not have been in
the hopeless position--incomprehensible to himself--in which he
felt himself now.  He could not now reconcile his immediate past,
his tenderness, his love for his sick wife, and for the other
man's child with what was now the case, that is with the fact
that, as it were, in return for all this he now found himself
alone, put to shame, a laughing-stock, needed by no one, and
despised by everyone.

For the first two days after his wife's departure Alexey
Alexandrovitch received applicants for assistance and his chief
secretary, drove to the committee, and went down to dinner in the
dining room as usual.  Without giving himself a reason for what
he was doing, he strained every nerve of his being for those two
days, simply to preserve an appearance of composure, and even of
indifference.  Answering inquiries about the disposition of Anna
Arkadyevna's rooms and belongings, he had exercised immense
self-control to appear like a man in whose eyes what had occurred
was not unforeseen nor out of the ordinary course of events, and
he attained his aim: no one could have detected in him signs of
despair.  But on the second day after her departure, when Korney
gave him a bill from a fashionable draper's shop, which Anna had
forgotten to pay, and announced that the clerk from the shop was
waiting, Alexey Alexandrovitch told him to show the clerk up.

"Excuse me, your excellency, for venturing to trouble you.  But
if you direct us to apply to her excellency, would you graciously
oblige us with her address?"

Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, as it seemed to the clerk, and
all at once, turning round, he sat down at the table.  Letting
his head sink into his hands, he sat for a long while in that
position, several times attempted to speak and stopped short.
Korney, perceiving his master's emotion, asked the clerk to call
another time.  Left alone, Alexey Alexandrovitch recognized that
he had not the strength to keep up the line of firmness and
composure any longer.  He gave orders for the carriage that was
awaiting him to be taken back, and for no one to be admitted, and
he did not go down to dinner.

He felt that he could not endure the weight of universal contempt
and exasperation, which he had distinctly seen in the face of the
clerk and of Korney, and of everyone, without exception, whom he
had met during those two days.  He felt that he could not turn
aside from himself the hatred of men, because that hatred did not
come from his being bad (in that case he could have tried to be
better), but from his being shamefully and repulsively unhappy.
He knew that for this, for the very fact that his heart was torn
with grief, they would be merciless to him.  He felt that men
would crush him as dogs strangle a torn dog yelping with pain.
He knew that his sole means of security against people was to
hide his wounds from them, and instinctively he tried to do this
for two days, but now he felt incapable of keeping up the unequal
struggle.

His despair was even intensified by the consciousness that he was
utterly alone in his sorrow.  In all Petersburg there was not a
human being to whom he could express what he was feeling, who
would feel for him, not as a high official, not as a member of
society, but simply as a suffering man; indeed he had not such a
one in the whole world.

Alexey Alexandrovitch grew up an orphan.  There were two
brothers.  They did not remember their father, and their mother
died when Alexey Alexandrovitch was ten years old.  The property
was a small one.  Their uncle, Karenin, a government official of
high standing, at one time a favorite of the late Tsar, had
brought them up.

On completing his high school and university courses with medals,
Alexey Alexandrovitch had, with his uncle's aid, immediately
started in a prominent position in the service, and from that
time forward he had devoted himself exclusively to political
ambition.  In the high school and the university, and afterwards
in the service, Alexey Alexandrovitch had never formed a close
friendship with anyone.  His brother had been the person nearest
to his heart, but he had a post in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, and was always abroad, where he had died shortly after
Alexey Alexandrovitch's marriage.

While he was governor of a province, Anna's aunt, a wealthy
provincial lady, had thrown him--middle-aged as he was, though
young for a governor--with her niece, and had succeeded in
putting him in such a position that he had either to declare
himself or to leave the town.  Alexey Alexandrovitch was not long
in hesitation.  There were at the time as many reasons for the
step as against it, and there was no overbalancing consideration
to outweigh his invariable rule of abstaining when in doubt.  But
Anna's aunt had through a common acquaintance insinuated that he
had already compromised the girl, and that he was in honor bound
to make her an offer.  He made the offer, and concentrated on his
betrothed and his wife all the feeling of which he was capable.

The attachment he felt to Anna precluded in his heart every need
of intimate relations with others.  And now among all his
acquaintances he had not one friend.  He had plenty of so-called
connections, but no friendships.  Alexey Alexandrovitch had
plenty of people whom he could invite to dinner, to whose
sympathy he could appeal in any public affair he was concerned
about, whose interest he could reckon upon for anyone he wished
to help, with whom he could candidly discuss other people's
business and affairs of state.  But his relations with these
people were confined to one clearly defined channel, and had a
certain routine from which it was impossible to depart.  There
was one man, a comrade of his at the university, with whom he had
made friends later, and with whom he could have spoken of a
personal sorrow; but this friend had a post in the Department of
Education in a remote part of Russia.  Of the people in
Petersburg the most intimate and most possible were his chief
secretary and his doctor.

Mihail Vassilievitch Sludin, the chief secretary, was a
straightforward, intelligent, good-hearted, and conscientious
man, and Alexey Alexandrovitch was aware of his personal
goodwill.  But their five years of official work together seemed
to have put a barrier between them that cut off warmer relations.

After signing the papers brought him, Alexey Alexandrovitch had
sat for a long while in silence, glancing at Mihail
Vassilievitch, and several times he attempted to speak, but could
not.  He had already prepared the phrase: "You have heard of my
trouble?"  But he ended by saying, as usual: "So you'll get this
ready for me?" and with that dismissed him.

The other person was the doctor, who had also a kindly feeling
for him; but there had long existed a taciturn understanding
between them that both were weighed down by work, and always in a
hurry.

Of his women friends, foremost amongst them Countess Lidia
Ivanovna, Alexey Alexandrovitch never thought.  All women, simply
as women, were terrible and distasteful to him.



Chapter 22


Alexey Alexandrovitch had forgotten the Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
but she had not forgotten him.  At the bitterest moment of his
lonely despair she came to him, and without waiting to be
announced, walked straight into his study.  She found him as he
was sitting with his head in both hands.

"_J'ai forcé la consigne_," she said, walking in with rapid steps
and breathing hard with excitement and rapid exercise.  "I have
heard all!  Alexey Alexandrovitch!  Dear friend!" she went on,
warmly squeezing his hand in both of hers and gazing with her
fine pensive eyes into his.

Alexey Alexandrovitch, frowning, got up, and disengaging his
hand, moved her a chair.

"Won't you sit down, countess?  I'm seeing no one because I'm
unwell, countess," he said, and his lips twitched.

"Dear friend!" repeated Countess Lidia Ivanovna, never taking her
eyes off his, and suddenly her eyebrows rose at the inner
corners, describing a triangle on her forehead, her ugly yellow
face became still uglier, but Alexey Alexandrovitch felt that she
was sorry for him and was preparing to cry.  And he too was
softened; he snatched her plump hand and proceeded to kiss it.

"Dear friend!" she said in a voice breaking with emotion.  "You
ought not to give way to grief.  Your sorrow is a great one, but
you ought to find consolation."

"I am crushed, I am annihilated, I am no longer a man!" said
Alexey Alexandrovitch, letting go her hand, but still gazing into
her brimming eyes.  "My position is so awful because I can find
nowhere, I cannot find within me strength to support me."

"You will find support; seek it--not in me, though I beseech you
to believe in my friendship," she said, with a sigh.  "Our
support is love, that love that He has vouchsafed us.  His burden
is light," she said, with the look of ecstasy Alexey
Alexandrovitch knew so well.  "He will be your support and your
succor."

Although there was in these words a flavor of that sentimental
emotion at her own lofty feelings, and that new mystical fervor
which had lately gained ground in Petersburg, and which seemed to
Alexey Alexandrovitch disproportionate, still it was pleasant to
him to hear this now.

"I am weak.  I am crushed.  I foresaw nothing, and now I
understand nothing."

"Dear friend," repeated Lidia Ivanovna.

"It's not the loss of what I have not now, it's not that!"
pursued Alexey Alexandrovitch.  "I do not grieve for that.  But
I cannot help feeling humiliated before other people for the
position I am placed in.  It is wrong, but I can't help it, I
can't help it."

"Not you it was performed that noble act of forgiveness, at which
I was moved to ecstasy, and everyone else too, but He, working
within your heart," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, raising her
eyes rapturously, "and so you cannot be ashamed of your act."

Alexey Alexandrovitch knitted his brows, and crooking his hands,
he cracked his fingers.

"One must know all the facts," he said in his thin voice.  "A
man's strength has its limits, countess, and I have reached my
limits.  The whole day I have had to be making arrangements,
arrangements about household matters arising" (he emphasized the
word _arising_) "from my new, solitary position.  The servants,
the governess, the accounts....  These pinpricks have stabbed me to
the heart, and I have not the strength to bear it.  At dinner...
yesterday, I was almost getting up from the dinner table.  I
could not bear the way my son looked at me.  He did not ask me
the meaning of it all, but he wanted to ask, and I could not bear
the look in his eyes.  He was afraid to look at me, but that is
not all...."  Alexey Alexandrovitch would have referred to the
bill that had been brought him, but his voice shook, and he
stopped.  That bill on blue paper, for a hat and ribbons, he
could not recall without a rush of self-pity.

"I understand, dear friend," said Lidia Ivanovna.  "I understand
it all.  Succor and comfort you will find not in me, though I
have come only to aid you if I can.  If I could take from off you
all these petty, humiliating cares...I understand that a woman's
word, a woman's superintendence is needed.  You will intrust it
to me?"

Silently and gratefully Alexey Alexandrovitch pressed her hand.

"Together we will take care of Seryozha.  Practical affairs are
not my strong point.  But I will set to work.  I will be your
housekeeper.  Don't thank me.  I do it not from myself..."

"I cannot help thanking you."

"But, dear friend, do not give way to the feeling of which you
spoke--being ashamed of what is the Christian's highest glory:
_he who humbles himself shall be exalted_.  And you cannot thank
me.  You must thank Him, and pray to Him for succor.  In Him
alone we find peace, consolation, salvation, and love," she said,
and turning her eyes heavenwards, she began praying, as Alexey
Alexandrovitch gathered from her silence.

Alexey Alexandrovitch listened to her now, and those expressions
which had seemed to him, if not distasteful, at least
exaggerated, now seemed to him natural and consolatory.  Alexey
Alexandrovitch had disliked this new enthusiastic fervor.  He was
a believer, who was interested in religion primarily in its
political aspect, and the new doctrine which ventured upon
several new interpretations, just because it paved the way to
discussion and analysis, was in principle disagreeable to him.
He had hitherto taken up a cold and even antagonistic attitude to
this new doctrine, and with Countess Lidia Ivanovna, who had been
carried away by it, he had never argued, but by silence had
assiduously parried her attempts to provoke him into argument.
Now for the first time he heard her words with pleasure, and did
not inwardly oppose them.

"I am very, very grateful to you, both for your deeds and for
your words," he said, when she had finished praying.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna once more pressed both her friend's
hands.

"Now I will enter upon my duties," she said with a smile after a
pause, as she wiped away the traces of tears.  "I am going to
Seryozha.  Only in the last extremity shall I apply to you." And
she got up and went out.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna went into Seryozha's part of the house,
and dropping tears on the scared child's cheeks, she told him
that his father was a saint and his mother was dead.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna kept her promise.  She did actually take
upon herself the care of the organization and management of
Alexey Alexandrovitch's household.  But she had not overstated
the case when saying that practical affairs were not her strong
point.  All her arrangements had to be modified because they
could not be carried out, and they were modified by Korney,
Alexey Alexandrovitch's valet, who, though no one was aware of
the fact, now managed Karenin's household, and quietly and
discreetly reported to his master while he was dressing all it
was necessary for him to know.  But Lidia Ivanovna's help was
none the less real; she gave Alexey Alexandrovitch moral support
in the consciousness of her love and respect for him, and still
more, as it was soothing to her to believe, in that she almost
turned him to Christianity--that is, from an indifferent and
apathetic believer she turned him into an ardent and steadfast
adherent of the new interpretation of Christian doctrine, which
had been gaining ground of late in Petersburg.  It was easy for
Alexey Alexandrovitch to believe in this teaching.  Alexey
Alexandrovitch, like Lidia Ivanovna indeed, and others who shared
their views, was completely devoid of vividness of imagination,
that spiritual faculty in virtue of which the conceptions evoked
by the imagination become so vivid that they must needs be in
harmony with other conceptions, and with actual fact.  He saw
nothing impossible and inconceivable in the idea that death,
though existing for unbelievers, did not exist for him, and that,
as he was possessed of the most perfect faith, of the measure of
which he was himself the judge, therefore there was no sin in his
soul, and he was experiencing complete salvation here on earth.

It is true that the erroneousness and shallowness of this
conception of his faith was dimly perceptible to Alexey
Alexandrovitch, and he knew that when, without the slightest idea
that his forgiveness was the action of a higher power, he had
surrendered directly to the feeling of forgiveness, he had felt
more happiness than now when he was thinking every instant that
Christ was in his heart, and that in signing official papers he
was doing His will.  But for Alexey Alexandrovitch it was a
necessity to think in that way; it was such a necessity for him
in his humiliation to have some elevated standpoint, however
imaginary, from which, looked down upon by all, he could look
down on others, that he clung, as to his one salvation, to his
delusion of salvation.



Chapter 23


The Countess Lidia Ivanovna had, as a very young and sentimental
girl, been married to a wealthy man of high rank, an extremely
good-natured, jovial, and extremely dissipated rake.  Two months
after marriage her husband abandoned her, and her impassioned
protestations of affection he met with a sarcasm and even
hostility that people knowing the count's good heart, and seeing
no defects in the sentimental Lidia, were at a loss to explain.
Though they were divorced and lived apart, yet whenever the
husband met the wife, he invariably behaved to her with the same
malignant irony, the cause of which was incomprehensible.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna had long given up being in love with her
husband, but from that time she had never given up being in love
with someone.  She was in love with several people at once, both
men and women; she had been in love with almost everyone who had
been particularly distinguished in any way.  She was in love with
all the new princes and princesses who married into the imperial
family; she had been in love with a high dignitary of the Church,
a vicar, and a parish priest; she had been in love with a
journalist, three Slavophiles, with Komissarov, with a minister,
a doctor, an English missionary and Karenin.  All these passions
constantly waning or growing more ardent, did not prevent her
from keeping up the most extended and complicated relations with
the court and fashionable society.  But from the time that after
Karenin's trouble she took him under her special protection, from
the time that she set to work in Karenin's household looking
after his welfare, she felt that all her other attachments were
not the real thing, and that she was now genuinely in love, and
with no one but Karenin.  The feeling she now experienced for him
seemed to her stronger than any of her former feelings.
Analyzing her feeling, and comparing it with former passions, she
distinctly perceived that she would not have been in love with
Komissarov if he had not saved the life of the Tsar, that she
would not have been in love with Ristitch-Kudzhitsky if there had
been no Slavonic question, but that she loved Karenin for
himself, for his lofty, uncomprehended soul, for the sweet--to
her--high notes of his voice, for his drawling intonation, his
weary eyes, his character, and his soft white hands with their
swollen veins.  She was not simply overjoyed at meeting him, but
she sought in his face signs of the impression she was making on
him.  She tried to please him, not by her words only, but in her
whole person.  For his sake it was that she now lavished more
care on her dress than before.  She caught herself in reveries on
what might have been, if she had not been married and he had been
free.  She blushed with emotion when he came into the room, she
could not repress a smile of rapture when he said anything
amiable to her.

For several days now Countess Lidia Ivanovna had been in a state
of intense excitement.  She had learned that Anna and Vronsky
were in Petersburg.  Alexey Alexandrovitch must be saved from
seeing her, he must be saved even from the torturing knowledge
that that awful woman was in the same town with him, and that he
might meet her any minute.

Lidia Ivanovna made inquiries through her friends as to what
those _infamous people_, as she called Anna and Vronsky, intended
doing, and she endeavored so to guide every movement of her
friend during those days that he could not come across them.  The
young adjutant, an acquaintance of Vronsky, through whom she
obtained her information, and who hoped through Countess Lidia
Ivanovna to obtain a concession, told her that they had finished
their business and were going away next day.  Lidia Ivanovna had
already begun to calm down, when the next morning a note was
brought her, the handwriting of which she recognized with horror.
It was the handwriting of Anna Karenina.  The envelope was of
paper as thick as bark; on the oblong yellow paper there was a
huge monogram, and the letter smelt of agreeable scent.

"Who brought it?"

"A commissionaire from the hotel."

It was some time before Countess Lidia Ivanovna could sit down to
read the letter.  Her excitement brought on an attack of asthma,
to which she was subject.  When she had recovered her composure,
she read the following letter in French:

"Madame la Comtesse,

"The Christian feelings with which your heart is filled give me
the, I feel, unpardonable boldness to write to you.  I am
miserable at being separated from my son.  I entreat permission
to see him once before my departure.  Forgive me for recalling
myself to your memory.  I apply to you and not to Alexey
Alexandrovitch, simply because I do not wish to cause that
generous man to suffer in remembering me.  Knowing your
friendship for him, I know you will understand me.  Could you
send Seryozha to me, or should I come to the house at some fixed
hour, or will you let me know when and where I could see him away
from home?  I do not anticipate a refusal, knowing the
magnanimity of him with whom it rests.  You cannot conceive the
craving I have to see him, and so cannot conceive the gratitude
your help will arouse in me.

Anna"

Everything in this letter exasperated Countess Lidia Ivanovna:
its contents and the allusion to magnanimity, and especially its
free and easy--as she considered--tone.

"Say that there is no answer," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, and
immediately opening her blotting-book, she wrote to Alexey
Alexandrovitch that she hoped to see him at one o'clock at the
levee.

"I must talk with you of a grave and painful subject.  There we
will arrange where to meet.  Best of all at my house, where I
will order tea _as you like it_.  Urgent.  He lays the cross, but
He gives the strength to bear it," she added, so as to give him
some slight preparation.  Countess Lidia Ivanovna usually wrote
some two or three letters a day to Alexey Alexandrovitch.  She
enjoyed that form of communication, which gave opportunity for a
refinement and air of mystery not afforded by their personal
interviews.



Chapter 24


The levee was drawing to a close.  People met as they were going
away, and gossiped of the latest news, of the newly bestowed
honors and the changes in the positions of the higher
functionaries.

"If only Countess Marya Borissovna were Minister of War, and
Princess Vatkovskaya were Commander-in-Chief," said a
gray-headed, little old man in a gold-embroidered uniform,
addressing a tall, handsome maid of honor who had questioned him
about the new appointments.

"And me among the adjutants," said the maid of honor, smiling.

"You have an appointment already.  You're over the ecclesiastical
department.  And your assistant's Karenin."

"Good-day, prince!" said the little old man to a man who came up
to him.

"What were you saying of Karenin?" said the prince.

"He and Putyatov have received the Alexander Nevsky."

"I thought he had it already."

"No.  Just look at him," said the little old man, pointing with
his embroidered hat to Karenin in a court uniform with the new
red ribbon across his shoulders, standing in the doorway of the
hall with an influential member of the Imperial Council.
"Pleased and happy as a brass farthing," he added, stopping to
shake hands with a handsome gentleman of the bedchamber of
colossal proportions.

"No; he's looking older," said the gentleman of the bedchamber.

"From overwork.  He's always drawing up projects nowadays.  He
won't let a poor devil go nowadays till he's explained it all to
him under heads."

"Looking older, did you say?  _Il fait des passions_.  I believe
Countess Lidia Ivanovna's jealous now of his wife."

"Oh, come now, please don't say any harm of Countess Lidia
Ivanovna."

"Why, is there any harm in her being in love with Karenin?"

"But is it true Madame Karenina's here?"

"Well, not here in the palace, but in Petersburg.  I met her
yesterday with Alexey Vronsky, _bras dessous, bras dessous_,
in the Morsky."

"C'est un homme qui n'a pas..." the gentleman of the bedchamber
was beginning, but he stopped to make room, bowing, for a member
of the Imperial family to pass.

Thus people talked incessantly of Alexey Alexandrovitch, finding
fault with him and laughing at him, while he, blocking up the way
of the member of the Imperial Council he had captured, was
explaining to him point by point his new financial project, never
interrupting his discourse for an instant for fear he should
escape.

Almost at the same time that his wife left Alexey Alexandrovitch
there had come to him that bitterest moment in the life of an
official--the moment when his upward career comes to a full stop.
This full stop had arrived and everyone perceived it, but Alexey
Alexandrovitch himself was not yet aware that his career was
over.  Whether it was due to his feud with Stremov, or his
misfortune with his wife, or simply that Alexey Alexandrovitch
had reached his destined limits, it had become evident to
everyone in the course of that year that his career was at an
end.  He still filled a position of consequence, he sat on many
commissions and committees, but he was a man whose day was over,
and from whom nothing was expected.  Whatever he said, whatever
he proposed, was heard as though it were something long familiar,
and the very thing that was not needed.  But Alexey
Alexandrovitch was not aware of this, and, on the contrary, being
cut off from direct participation in governmental activity, he
saw more clearly than ever the errors and defects in the action
of others, and thought it his duty to point out means for their
correction.  Shortly after his separation from his wife, he began
writing his first note on the new judicial procedure, the first
of the endless series of notes he was destined to write in the
future.

Alexey Alexandrovitch did not merely fail to observe his hopeless
position in the official world, he was not merely free from
anxiety on this head, he was positively more satisfied than ever
with his own activity.

"He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the
Lord, how he may please the Lord: But he that is married careth
for the things that are of the world, how he may please his
wife," says the Apostle Paul, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, who was
now guided in every action by Scripture, often recalled this
text.  It seemed to him that ever since he had been left without
a wife, he had in these very projects of reform been serving the
Lord more zealously than before.

The unmistakable impatience of the member of the Council trying
to get away from him did not trouble Alexey Alexandrovitch; he
gave up his exposition only when the member of the Council,
seizing his chance when one of the Imperial family was passing,
slipped away from him.

Left alone, Alexey Alexandrovitch looked down, collecting his
thoughts, then looked casually about him and walked towards the
door, where he hoped to meet Countess Lidia Ivanovna.

"And how strong they all are, how sound physically," thought
Alexey Alexandrovitch, looking at the powerfully built gentleman
of the bedchamber with his well-combed, perfumed whiskers, and at
the red neck of the prince, pinched by his tight uniform.  He had
to pass them on his way.  "Truly is it said that all the world is
evil," he thought, with another sidelong glance at the calves of
the gentleman of the bedchamber.

Moving forward deliberately, Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed with his
customary air of weariness and dignity to the gentleman who had
been talking about him, and looking towards the door, his eyes
sought Countess Lidia Ivanovna.

"Ah! Alexey Alexandrovitch!" said the little old man, with a
malicious light in his eyes, at the moment when Karenin was on a
level with them, and was nodding with a frigid gesture, "I
haven't congratulated you yet," said the old man, pointing to his
newly received ribbon.

"Thank you," answered Alexey Alexandrovitch.  "What an _exquisite_
day to-day," he added, laying emphasis in his peculiar way on the
word _exquisite_.

That they laughed at him he was well aware, but he did not expect
anything but hostility from them; he was used to that by now.

Catching sight of the yellow shoulders of Lidia Ivanovna jutting
out above her corset, and her fine pensive eyes bidding him to
her, Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled, revealing untarnished white
teeth, and went towards her.

Lidia Ivanovna's dress had cost her great pains, as indeed all
her dresses had done of late.  Her aim in dress was now quite the
reverse of that she had pursued thirty years before.  Then her
desire had been to adorn herself with something, and the more
adorned the better.  Now, on the contrary, she was perforce
decked out in a way so inconsistent with her age and her figure,
that her one anxiety was to contrive that the contrast between
these adornments and her own exterior should not be too
appalling.  And as far as Alexey Alexandrovitch was concerned she
succeeded, and was in his eyes attractive.  For him she was the
one island not only of goodwill to him, but of love in the midst
of the sea of hostility and jeering that surrounded him.

Passing through rows of ironical eyes, he was drawn as naturally
to her loving glance as a plant to the sun.

"I congratulate you," she said to him, her eyes on his ribbon.

Suppressing a smile of pleasure, he shrugged his shoulders,
closing his eyes, as though to say that that could not be a
source of joy to him.  Countess Lidia Ivanovna was very well
aware that it was one of his chief sources of satisfaction,
though he never admitted it.

"How is our angel?" said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, meaning
Seryozha.

"I can't say I was quite pleased with him," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, raising his eyebrows and opening his eyes.  "And
Sitnikov is not satisfied with him."  (Sitnikov was the tutor to
whom Seryozha's secular education had been intrusted.)  "As I
have mentioned to you, there's a sort of coldness in him towards
the most important questions which ought to touch the heart of
every man and every child...."  Alexey Alexandrovitch began
expounding his views on the sole question that interested him
besides the service--the education of his son.

When Alexey Alexandrovitch with Lidia Ivanovna's help had been
brought back anew to life and activity, he felt it his duty to
undertake the education of the son left on his hands.  Having
never before taken any interest in educational questions, Alexey
Alexandrovitch devoted some time to the theoretical study of the
subject.  After reading several books on anthropology, education,
and didactics, Alexey Alexandrovitch drew up a plan of education,
and engaging the best tutor in Petersburg to superintend it, he
set to work, and the subject continually absorbed him.

"Yes, but the heart.  I see in him his father's heart, and with
such a heart a child cannot go far wrong," said Lidia Ivanovna
with enthusiasm.

"Yes, perhaps....  As for me, I do my duty.  It's all I can
do."

"You're coming to me," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, after a
pause; "we have to speak of a subject painful for you.  I would
give anything to have spared you certain memories, but others
are not of the same mind.  I have received a letter from _her_.
_She_ is here in Petersburg."

Alexey Alexandrovitch shuddered at the allusion to his wife, but
immediately his face assumed the deathlike rigidity which
expressed utter helplessness in the matter.

"I was expecting it," he said.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna looked at him ecstatically, and tears of
rapture at the greatness of his soul came into her eyes.



Chapter 25


When Alexey Alexandrovitch came into the Countess Lidia
Ivanovna's snug little boudoir, decorated with old china and hung
with portraits, the lady herself had not yet made her appearance.

She was changing her dress.

A cloth was laid on a round table, and on it stood a china
tea service and a silver spirit-lamp and tea kettle.  Alexey
Alexandrovitch looked idly about at the endless familiar
portraits which adorned the room, and sitting down to the table,
he opened a New Testament lying upon it.  The rustle of the
countess's silk skirt drew his attention off.

"Well now, we can sit quietly," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
slipping hurriedly with an agitated smile between the table and
the sofa, "and talk over our tea."

After some words of preparation, Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
breathing hard and flushing crimson, gave into Alexey
Alexandrovitch's hands the letter she had received.

After reading the letter, he sat a long while in silence.

"I don't think I have the right to refuse her," he said,
timidly lifting his eyes.

"Dear friend, you never see evil in anyone!"

"On the contrary, I see that all is evil.  But whether it is
just..."

His face showed irresolution, and a seeking for counsel, support,
and guidance in a matter he did not understand.

"No," Countess Lidia Ivanovna interrupted him; "there are limits
to everything.  I can understand immorality," she said, not
quite truthfully, since she never could understand that which
leads women to immorality; "but I don't understand cruelty: to
whom? to you!  How can she stay in the town where you are?  No,
the longer one lives the more one learns.  And I'm learning to
understand your loftiness and her baseness."

"Who is to throw a stone?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
unmistakably pleased with the part he had to play.  "I have
forgiven all, and so I cannot deprive her of what is exacted by
love in her--by her love for her son...."

"But is that love, my friend?  Is it sincere?  Admitting that you
have forgiven--that you forgive--have we the right to work on the
feelings of that angel?  He looks on her as dead.  He prays for
her, and beseeches God to have mercy on her sins.  And it is
better so.  But now what will he think?"

"I had not thought of that," said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
evidently agreeing.

Countess Lidia Ivanovna hid her face in her hands and was silent.
she was praying.

"If you ask my advice," she said, having finished her prayer and
uncovered her face, "I do not advise you to do this.  Do you
suppose I don't see how you are suffering, how this has torn open
your wounds?  But supposing that, as always, you don't think of
yourself, what can it lead to?--to fresh suffering for you, to
torture for the child.  If there were a trace of humanity left in
her, she ought not to wish for it herself.  No, I have no
hesitation in saying I advise not, and if you will intrust it to
me, I will write to her."

And Alexey Alexandrovitch consented, and Countess Lidia Ivanovna
sent the following letter in French:

"Dear Madame,

"To be reminded of you might have results for your son in leading
to questions on his part which could not be answered without
implanting in the child's soul a spirit of censure towards what
should be for him sacred, and therefore I beg you to interpret
your husband's refusal in the spirit of Christian love.  I pray
to Almighty God to have mercy on you.
                                Countess Lidia"

This letter attained the secret object which Countess Lidia
Ivanovna had concealed from herself.  It wounded Anna to the
quick.

For his part, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on returning home from Lidia
Ivanovna's, could not all that day concentrate himself on his
usual pursuits, and find that spiritual peace of one saved and
believing which he had felt of late.

The thought of his wife, who had so greatly sinned against him,
and towards whom he had been so saintly, as Countess Lidia
Ivanovna had so justly told him, ought not to have troubled him;
but he was not easy; he could not understand the book he was
reading; he could not drive away harassing recollections of his
relations with her, of the mistake which, as it now seemed, he
had made in regard to her.  The memory of how he had received her
confession of infidelity on their way home from the races
(especially that he had insisted only on the observance of
external decorum, and had not sent a challenge) tortured him like
a remorse.  He was tortured too by the thought of the letter he
had written her; and most of all, his forgiveness, which nobody
wanted, and his care of the other man's child made his heart burn
with shame and remorse.

And just the same feeling of shame and regret he felt now, as he
reviewed all his past with her, recalling the awkward words in
which, after long wavering, he had made her an offer.

"But how have I been to blame?" he said to himself.  And this
question always excited another question in him--whether they
felt differently, did their loving and marrying differently,
these Vronskys and Oblonskys...these gentlemen of the
bedchamber, with their fine calves.  And there passed before his
mind a whole series of these mettlesome, vigorous, self-
confident men, who always and everywhere drew his inquisitive
attention in spite of himself.  He tried to dispel these
thoughts, he tried to persuade himself that he was not living for
this transient life, but for the life of eternity, and that there
was peace and love in his heart.

But the fact that he had in this transient, trivial life made, as
it seemed to him, a few trivial mistakes tortured him as though
the eternal salvation in which he believed had no existence.  But
this temptation did not last long, and soon there was
reestablished once more in Alexey Alexandrovitch's soul the peace
and the elevation by virtue of which he could forget what he did
not want to remember.



Chapter 26


"Well, Kapitonitch?" said Seryozha, coming back rosy and good-
humored from his walk the day before his birthday, and giving his
overcoat to the tall old hall porter, who smiled down at the
little person from the height of his long figure.  "Well, has the
bandaged clerk been here today?  Did papa see him?"

"He saw him.  The minute the chief secretary came out, I
announced him," said the hall porter with a good-humored wink.
"Here, I'll take it off."

"Seryozha!" said the tutor, stopping in the doorway leading to
the inner rooms.  "Take it off yourself."  But Seryozha, though
he heard his tutor's feeble voice, did not pay attention to it.
He stood keeping hold of the hall porter's belt, and gazing into
his face.

"Well, and did papa do what he wanted for him?"

The hall porter nodded his head affirmatively.  The clerk with
his face tied up, who had already been seven times to ask some
favor of Alexey Alexandrovitch, interested both Seryozha and the
hall porter.  Seryozha had come upon him in the hall, and had
heard him plaintively beg the hall porter to announce him, saying
that he and his children had death staring them in the face.

Since then Seryozha, having met him a second time in the hall,
took great interest in him.

"Well, was he very glad?" he asked.

"Glad?  I should think so!  Almost dancing as he walked away."

"And has anything been left?" asked Seryozha, after a pause.

"Come, sir," said the hall-porter; then with a shake of his head
he whispered, "Something from the countess."

Seryozha understood at once that what the hall porter was
speaking of was a present from Countess Lidia Ivanovna for his
birthday.

"What do you say?  Where?"

"Korney took it to your papa.  A fine plaything it must be too!"

"How big?  Like this?"

"Rather small, but a fine thing."

"A book."

"No, a thing.  Run along, run along, Vassily Lukitch is calling
you," said the porter, hearing the tutor's steps approaching, and
carefully taking away from his belt the little hand in the glove
half pulled off, he signed with his head towards the tutor.

"Vassily Lukitch, in a tiny minute!" answered Seryozha with that
gay and loving smile which always won over the conscientious
Vassily Lukitch.

Seryozha was too happy, everything was too delightful for him to
be able to help sharing with his friend the porter the family
good fortune of which he had heard during his walk in the public
gardens from Lidia Ivanovna's niece.  This piece of good news
seemed to him particularly important from its coming at the same
time with the gladness of the bandaged clerk and his own gladness
at toys having come for him.  It seemed to Seryozha that this was
a day on which everyone ought to be glad and happy.

"You know papa's received the Alexander Nevsky today?"

"To be sure I do!  People have been already to congratulate him."

"And is he glad?"

"Glad at the Tsar's gracious favor!  I should think so!  It's a
proof he's deserved it," said the porter severely and seriously.

Seryozha fell to dreaming, gazing up at the face of the porter,
which he had thoroughly studied in every detail, especially the
chin that hung down between the gray whiskers, never seen by
anyone but Seryozha, who saw him only from below.

"Well, and has your daughter been to see you lately?"

The porter's daughter was a ballet dancer.

"When is she to come on week-days?  They've their lessons to
learn too.  And you've your lesson, sir; run along."

On coming into the room, Seryozha, instead of sitting down to his
lessons, told his tutor of his supposition that what had been
brought him must be a machine.  "What do you think?" he inquired.

But Vassily Lukitch was thinking of nothing but the necessity of
learning the grammar lesson for the teacher, who was coming at
two.

"No, do just tell me, Vassily Lukitch," he asked suddenly, when
he was seated at their work table with the book in his hands,
"what is greater than the Alexander Nevsky?  You know papa's
received the Alexander Nevsky?"

Vassily Lukitch replied that the Vladimir was greater than the
Alexander Nevsky.

"And higher still?"

"Well, highest of all is the Andrey Pervozvanny."

"And higher than the Andrey?"

"I don't know."

"What, you don't know?" and Seryozha, leaning on his elbows, sank
into deep meditation.

His meditations were of the most complex and diverse character.
He imagined his father's having suddenly been presented with both
the Vladimir and the Andrey today, and in consequence being much
better tempered at his lesson, and dreamed how, when he was grown
up, he would himself receive all the orders, and what they might
invent higher than the Andrey.  Directly any higher order were
invented, he would win it.  They would make a higher one still,
and he would immediately win that too.

The time passed in such meditations, and when the teacher came,
the lesson about the adverbs of place and time and manner of
action was not ready, and the teacher was not only displeased,
but hurt.  This touched Seryozha.  He felt he was not to blame
for not having learned the lesson; however much he tried, he was
utterly unable to do that.  As long as the teacher was explaining
to him, he believed him and seemed to comprehend, but as soon as
he was left alone, he was positively unable to recollect and to
understand that the short and familiar word "suddenly" is an
adverb of manner of action.  Still he was sorry that he had
disappointed the teacher.

He chose a moment when the teacher was looking in silence at the
book.

"Mihail Ivanitch, when is your birthday?" he asked all, of a
sudden.

"You'd much better be thinking about your work.  Birthdays are of
no importance to a rational being.  It's a day like any other on
which one has to do one's work."

Seryozha looked intently at the teacher, at his scanty beard, at
his spectacles, which had slipped down below the ridge on his
nose, and fell into so deep a reverie that he heard nothing of
what the teacher was explaining to him.  He knew that the teacher
did not think what he said; he felt it from the tone in which it
was said.  "But why have they all agreed to speak just in the
same manner always the dreariest and most useless stuff?  Why
does he keep me off; why doesn't he love me?" he asked himself
mournfully, and could not think of an answer.



Chapter 27


After the lesson with the grammar teacher came his father's
lesson.  While waiting for his father, Seryozha sat at the table
playing with a penknife, and fell to dreaming.  Among Seryozha's
favorite occupations was searching for his mother during his
walks.  He did not believe in death generally, and in her death
in particular, in spite of what Lidia Ivanovna had told him and
his father had confirmed, and it was just because of that, and
after he had been told she was dead, that he had begun looking
for her when out for a walk.  Every woman of full, graceful
figure with dark hair was his mother.  At the sight of such a
woman such a feeling of tenderness was stirred within him that
his breath failed him, and tears came into his eyes.  And he was
on the tiptoe of expectation that she would come up to him, would
lift her veil.  All her face would be visible, she would smile,
she would hug him, he would sniff her fragrance, feel the
softness of her arms, and cry with happiness, just as he had one
evening lain on her lap while she tickled him, and he laughed and
bit her white, ring-covered fingers.  Later, when he accidentally
learned from his old nurse that his mother was not dead, and his
father and Lidia Ivanovna had explained to him that she was dead
to him because she was wicked (which he could not possibly
believe, because he loved her), he went on seeking her and
expecting her in the same way.  That day in the public gardens
there had been a lady in a lilac veil, whom he had watched with a
throbbing heart, believing it to be she as she came towards them
along the path.  The lady had not come up to them, but had
disappeared somewhere.  That day, more intensely than ever,
Seryozha felt a rush of love for her, and now, waiting for his
father, he forgot everything, and cut all round the edge of the
table with his penknife, staring straight before him with
sparkling eyes and dreaming of her.

"Here is your papa!" said Vassily Lukitch, rousing him.

Seryozha jumped up and went up to his father, and kissing his
hand, looked at him intently, trying to discover signs of his joy
at receiving the Alexander Nevsky.

"Did you have a nice walk?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, sitting
down in his easy chair, pulling the volume of the Old Testament
to him and opening it.  Although Alexey Alexandrovitch had more
than once told Seryozha that every Christian ought to know
Scripture history thoroughly, he often referred to the Bible
himself during the lesson, and Seryozha observed this.

"Yes, it was very nice indeed, papa," said Seryozha, sitting
sideways on his chair and rocking it, which was forbidden.  "I
saw Nadinka" (Nadinka was a niece of Lidia Ivanovna's who was
being brought up in her house).  "She told me you'd been given a
new star.  Are you glad, papa?"

"First of all, don't rock your chair, please," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.  "And secondly, it's not the reward that's
precious, but the work itself.  And I could have wished you
understood that.  If you now are going to work, to study in order
to win a reward, then the work will seem hard to you; but when
you work" (Alexey Alexandrovitch, as he spoke, thought of how he
had been sustained by a sense of duty through the wearisome labor
of the morning, consisting of signing one hundred and eighty
papers), "loving your work, you will find your reward in it."

Seryozha's eyes, that had been shining with gaiety and
tenderness, grew dull and dropped before his father's gaze.  This
was the same long-familiar tone his father always took with him,
and Seryozha had learned by now to fall in with it.  His father
always talked to him--so Seryozha felt--as though he were
addressing some boy of his own imagination, one of those boys
that exist in books, utterly unlike himself.  And Seryozha always
tried with his father to act being the story-book boy.

"You understand that, I hope?" said his father.

"Yes, papa," answered Seryozha, acting the part of the imaginary
boy.

The lesson consisted of learning by heart several verses out of
the Gospel and the repetition of the beginning of the Old
Testament.  The verses from the Gospel Seryozha knew fairly well,
but at the moment when he was saying them he became so absorbed
in watching the sharply protruding, bony knobbiness of his
father's forehead, that he lost the thread, and he transposed the
end of one verse and the beginning of another.  So it was evident
to Alexey Alexandrovitch that he did not understand what he was
saying, and that irritated him.

He frowned, and began explaining what Seryozha had heard many
times before and never could remember, because he understood it
too well, just as that "suddenly" is an adverb of manner of
action.  Seryozha looked with scared eyes at his father, and
could think of nothing but whether his father would make him
repeat what he had said, as he sometimes did.  And this thought
so alarmed Seryozha that he now understood nothing.  But his
father did not make him repeat it, and passed on to the lesson
out of the Old Testament.  Seryozha recounted the events
themselves well enough, but when he had to answer questions as to
what certain events prefigured, he knew nothing, though he had
already been punished over this lesson.  The passage at which he
was utterly unable to say anything, and began fidgeting and
cutting the table and swinging his chair, was where he had to
repeat the patriarchs before the Flood.  He did not know one of
them, except Enoch, who had been taken up alive to heaven.  Last
time he had remembered their names, but now he had forgotten them
utterly, chiefly because Enoch was the personage he liked best in
the whole of the Old Testament, and Enoch's translation to heaven
was connected in his mind with a whole long train of thought, in
which he became absorbed now while he gazed with fascinated eyes
at his father's watch-chain and a half-unbuttoned button on his
waistcoat.

In death, of which they talked to him so often, Seryozha
disbelieved entirely.  He did not believe that those he loved
could die, above all that he himself would die.  That was to him
something utterly inconceivable and impossible.  But he had been
told that all men die; he had asked people, indeed, whom he
trusted, and they too, had confirmed it; his old nurse, too, said
the same, though reluctantly.  But Enoch had not died, and so it
followed that everyone did not die.  "And why cannot anyone else
so serve God and be taken alive to heaven?" thought Seryozha.
Bad people, that is those Seryozha did not like, they might die,
but the good might all be like Enoch.

"Well, what are the names of the patriarchs?"

"Enoch, Enos--"

"But you have said that already.  This is bad, Seryozha, very
bad.  If you don't try to learn what is more necessary than
anything for a Christian," said his father, getting up, "whatever
can interest you?  I am displeased with you, and Piotr Ignatitch"
(this was the most important of his teachers) "is displeased with
you....  I shall have to punish you."

His father and his teacher were both displeased with Seryozha,
and he certainly did learn his lessons very badly.  But still it
could not be said he was a stupid boy.  On the contrary, he was
far cleverer than the boys his teacher held up as examples to
Seryozha.  In his father's opinion, he did not want to learn what
he was taught.  In reality he could not learn that.  He could
not, because the claims of his own soul were more binding on him
than those claims his father and his teacher made upon him.
Those claims were in opposition, and he was in direct conflict
with his education.  He was nine years old; he was a child; but
he knew his own soul, it was precious to him, he guarded it as
the eyelid guards the eye, and without the key of love he let no
one into his soul.  His teachers complained that he would not
learn, while his soul was brimming over with thirst for
knowledge.  And he learned from Kapitonitch, from his nurse, from
Nadinka, from Vassily Lukitch, but not from his teachers.  The
spring his father and his teachers reckoned upon to turn their
mill-wheels had long dried up at the source, but its waters did
their work in another channel.

His father punished Seryozha by not letting him go to see
Nadinka, Lidia Ivanovna's niece; but this punishment turned out
happily for Seryozha.  Vassily Lukitch was in a good humor, and
showed him how to make windmills.  The whole evening passed over
this work and in dreaming how to make a windmill on which he
could turn himself--clutching at the sails or tying himself on
and whirling round.  Of his mother Seryozha did not think all the
evening, but when he had gone to bed, he suddenly remembered her,
and prayed in his own words that his mother tomorrow for his
birthday might leave off hiding herself and come to him.

"Vassily Lukitch, do you know what I prayed for tonight extra
besides the regular things?"

"That you might learn your lessons better?"

"No."

"Toys?"

"No.  You'll never guess.  A splendid thing; but it's a secret!
When it comes to pass I'll tell you.  Can't you guess!"

"No, I can't guess.  You tell me," said Vassily Lukitch with a
smile, which was rare with him.  "Come, lie down, I'm putting out
the candle."

"Without the candle I can see better what I see and what I prayed
for.  There!  I was almost telling the secret!" said Seryozha,
laughing gaily.

When the candle was taken away, Seryozha heard and felt his
mother.  She stood over him, and with loving eyes caressed him.
But then came windmills, a knife, everything began to be mixed
up, and he fell asleep.



Chapter 28


On arriving in Petersburg, Vronsky and Anna stayed at one of the
best hotels; Vronsky apart in a lower story, Anna above with
her child, its nurse, and her maid, in a large suite of four
rooms.

On the day of his arrival Vronsky went to his brother's.  There
he found his mother, who had come from Moscow on business.  His
mother and sister-in-law greeted him as usual: they asked him
about his stay abroad, and talked of their common acquaintances,
but did not let drop a single word in allusion to his connection
with Anna.  His brother came the next morning to see Vronsky, and
of his own accord asked him about her, and Alexey Vronsky told
him directly that he looked upon his connection with Madame
Karenina as marriage; that he hoped to arrange a divorce, and
then to marry her, and until then he considered her as much a
wife as any other wife, and he begged him to tell their mother
and his wife so.

"If the world disapproves, I don't care," said Vronsky; "but if
my relations want to be on terms of relationship with me, they
will have to be on the same terms with my wife."

The elder brother, who had always a respect for his younger
brother's judgment, could not well tell whether he was right or
not till the world had decided the question; for his part he had
nothing against it, and with Alexey he went up to see Anna.

Before his brother, as before everyone, Vronsky addressed Anna
with a certain formality, treating her as he might a very
intimate friend, but it was understood that his brother knew
their real relations, and they talked about Anna's going to
Vronsky's estate.

In spite of all his social experience Vronsky was, in consequence
of the new position in which he was placed, laboring under a
strange misapprehension.  One would have thought he must have
understood that society was closed for him and Anna; but now some
vague ideas had sprung up in his brain that this was only the
case in old-fashioned days, and that now with the rapidity of
modern progress (he had unconsciously become by now a partisan of
every sort of progress) the views of society had changed, and
that the question whether they would be received in society was
not a foregone conclusion.  "Of course," he thought, "she would
not be received at court, but intimate friends can and must look
at it in the proper light."  One may sit for several hours at a
stretch with one's legs crossed in the same position, if one
knows that there's nothing to prevent one's changing one's
position; but if a man knows that he must remain sitting so with
crossed legs, then cramps come on, the legs begin to twitch and
to strain towards the spot to which one would like to draw them.
This was what Vronsky was experiencing in regard to the world.
Though at the bottom of his heart he knew that the world was shut
on them, he put it to the test whether the world had not changed
by now and would not receive them.  But he very quickly perceived
that though the world was open for him personally, it was closed
for Anna.  Just as in the game of cat and mouse, the hands raised
for him were dropped to bar the way for Anna.

One of the first ladies of Petersburg society whom Vronsky saw
was his cousin Betsy.

"At last!" she greeted him joyfully.  "And Anna?  How glad I am!
Where are you stopping?  I can fancy after your delightful
travels you must find our poor Petersburg horrid.  I can fancy
your honeymoon in Rome.  How about the divorce?  Is that all
over?"

Vronsky noticed that Betsy's enthusiasm waned when she learned
that no divorce had as yet taken place.

"People will throw stones at me, I know," she said, "but I shall
come and see Anna; yes, I shall certainly come.  You won't be
here long, I suppose?"

And she did certainly come to see Anna the same day, but her tone
was not at all the same as in former days.  She unmistakably
prided herself on her courage, and wished Anna to appreciate the
fidelity of her friendship.  She only stayed ten minutes, talking
of society gossip, and on leaving she said:

"You've never told me when the divorce is to be?  Supposing I'm
ready to fling my cap over the mill, other starchy people will
give you the cold shoulder until you're married.  And that's so
simple nowadays.  _Ça se fait_.  So you're going on Friday?  Sorry
we shan't see each other again."

From Betsy's tone Vronsky might have grasped what he had to
expect from the world; but he made another effort in his own
family.  His mother he did not reckon upon.  He knew that his
mother, who had been so enthusiastic over Anna at their first
acquaintance, would have no mercy on her now for having ruined
her son's career.  But he had more hope of Varya, his brother's
wife.  He fancied she would not throw stones, and would go simply
and directly to see Anna, and would receive her in her own
house.

The day after his arrival Vronsky went to her, and finding her
alone, expressed his wishes directly.

"You know, Alexey," she said after hearing him, "how fond I am of
you, and how ready I am to do anything for you; but I have not
spoken, because I knew I could be of no use to you and to Anna
Arkadyevna," she said, articulating the name "Anna Arkadyevna"
with particular care.  "Don't suppose, please, that I judge her.
Never; perhaps in her place I should have done the same.  I don't
and can't enter into that," she said, glancing timidly at his
gloomy face.  "But one must call things by their names.  You want
me to go and see her, to ask her here, and to rehabilitate her in
society; but do understand that I _cannot_ do so.  I have daughters
growing up, and I must live in the world for my husband's sake.
Well, I'm ready to come and see Anna Arkadyevna: she will
understand that I can't ask her here, or I should have to do so
in such a way that she would not meet people who look at things
differently; that would offend her.  I can't raise her..."

"Oh, I don't regard her as fallen more than hundreds of women you
do receive!" Vronsky interrupted her still more gloomily, and he
got up in silence, understanding that his sister-in-law's
decision was not to be shaken.

"Alexey! don't be angry with me.  Please understand that I'm not
to blame," began Varya, looking at him with a timid smile.

"I'm not angry with you," he said still as gloomily; "but I'm
sorry in two ways.  I'm sorry, too, that this means breaking up
our friendship--if not breaking up, at least weakening it.  You
will understand that for me, too, it cannot be otherwise."

And with that he left her.

Vronsky knew that further efforts were useless, and that he had
to spend these few days in Petersburg as though in a strange
town, avoiding every sort of relation with his own old circle in
order not to be exposed to the annoyances and humiliations which
were so intolerable to him.  One of the most unpleasant features
of his position in Petersburg was that Alexey Alexandrovitch and
his name seemed to meet him everywhere.  He could not begin to
talk of anything without the conversation turning on Alexey
Alexandrovitch; he could not go anywhere without risk of meeting
him.  So at least it seemed to Vronsky, just as it seems to a man
with a sore finger that he is continually, as though on purpose,
grazing his sore finger on everything.

Their stay in Petersburg was the more painful to Vronsky that he
perceived all the time a sort of new mood that he could not
understand in Anna.  At one time she would seem in love with him,
and then she would become cold, irritable, and impenetrable.  She
was worrying over something, and keeping something back from him,
and did not seem to notice the humiliations which poisoned his
existence, and for her, with her delicate intuition, must have
been still more unbearable.



Chapter 29


One of Anna's objects in coming back to Russia had been to see
her son.  From the day she left Italy the thought of it had never
ceased to agitate her.  And as she got nearer to Petersburg, the
delight and importance of this meeting grew ever greater in her
imagination.  She did not even put to herself the question how to
arrange it.  It seemed to her natural and simple to see her son
when she should be in the same town with him.  But on her arrival
in Petersburg she was suddenly made distinctly aware of her
present position in society, and she grasped the fact that to
arrange this meeting was no easy matter.

She had now been two days in Petersburg.  The thought of her son
never left her for a single instant, but she had not yet seen
him.  To go straight to the house, where she might meet Alexey
Alexandrovitch, that she felt she had no right to do.  She might
be refused admittance and insulted.  To write and so enter into
relations with her husband--that it made her miserable to think
of doing; she could only be at peace when she did not think of
her husband.  To get a glimpse of her son out walking, finding
out where and when he went out, was not enough for her; she had
so looked forward to this meeting, she had so much she must say
to him, she so longed to embrace him, to kiss him.  Seryozha's
old nurse might be a help to her and show her what to do.  But
the nurse was not now living in Alexey Alexandrovitch's house.
In this uncertainty, and in efforts to find the nurse, two days
had slipped by.

Hearing of the close intimacy between Alexey Alexandrovitch and
Countess Lidia Ivanovna, Anna decided on the third day to write
to her a letter, which cost her great pains, and in which she
intentionally said that permission to see her son must depend on
her husband's generosity.  She knew that if the letter were shown
to her husband, he would keep up his character of magnanimity,
and would not refuse her request.

The commissionaire who took the letter had brought her back the
most cruel and unexpected answer, that there was no answer.  She
had never felt so humiliated as at the moment when, sending for
the commissionaire, she heard from him the exact account of how
he had waited, and how afterwards he had been told there was no
answer.  Anna felt humiliated, insulted, but she saw that from
her point of view Countess Lidia Ivanovna was right.  Her
suffering was the more poignant that she had to bear it in
solitude.  She could not and would not share it with Vronsky.
She knew that to him, although he was the primary cause of her
distress, the question of her seeing her son would seem a matter
of very little consequence.  She knew that he would never be
capable of understanding all the depth of her suffering, that for
his cool tone at any allusion to it she would begin to hate him.
And she dreaded that more than anything in the world, and so she
hid from him everything that related to her son.  Spending the
whole day at home she considered ways of seeing her son, and had
reached a decision to write to her husband.  She was just
composing this letter when she was handed the letter from Lidia
Ivanovna.  The countess's silence had subdued and depressed her,
but the letter, all that she read between the lines in it, so
exasperated her, this malice was so revolting beside her
passionate, legitimate tenderness for her son, that she turned
against other people and left off blaming herself.

"This coldness--this pretense of feeling!" she said to herself.
"They must needs insult me and torture the child, and I am to
submit to it!  Not on any consideration!  She is worse than I am.
I don't lie, anyway."  And she decided on the spot that next day,
Seryozha's birthday, she would go straight to her husband's
house, bribe or deceive the servants, but at any cost see her son
and overturn the hideous deception with which they were
encompassing the unhappy child.

She went to a toy shop, bought toys and thought over a plan of
action.  She would go early in the morning at eight o'clock, when
Alexey Alexandrovitch would be certain not to be up.  She would
have money in her hand to give the hall porter and the footman,
so that they should let her in, and not raising her veil, she
would say that she had come from Seryozha's godfather to
congratulate him, and that she had been charged to leave the toys
at his bedside.  She had prepared everything but the words she
should say to her son.  Often as she had dreamed of it, she could
never think of anything.

The next day, at eight o'clock in the morning, Anna got out of a
hired sledge and rang at the front entrance of her former home.

"Run and see what's wanted.  Some lady," said Kapitonitch, who,
not yet dressed, in his overcoat and galoshes, had peeped out of
the window and seen a lady in a veil standing close up to the
door.  His assistant, a lad Anna did not know, had no sooner
opened the door to her than she came in, and pulling a
three-rouble note out of her muff put it hurriedly into his hand.

"Seryozha--Sergey Alexeitch," she said, and was going on.
Scrutinizing the note, the porter's assistant stopped her at the
second glass door.

"Whom do you want?" he asked.

She did not hear his words and made no answer.

Noticing the embarrassment of the unknown lady, Kapitonitch went
out to her, opened the second door for her, and asked her what
she was pleased to want.

"From Prince Skorodumov for Sergey Alexeitch," she said.

"His honor's not up yet," said the porter, looking at her
attentively.

Anna had not anticipated that the absolutely unchanged hall of
the house where she had lived for nine years would so greatly
affect her.  Memories sweet and painful rose one after another in
her heart, and for a moment she forgot what she was here for.

"Would you kindly wait?" said Kapitonitch, taking off her fur
cloak.

As he took off the cloak, Kapitonitch glanced at her face,
recognized her, and made her a low bow in silence.

"Please walk in, your excellency," he said to her.

She tried to say something, but her voice refused to utter any
sound; with a guilty and imploring glance at the old man she went
with light, swift steps up the stairs.  Bent double, and his
galoshes catching in the steps, Kapitonitch ran after her, trying
to overtake her.

"The tutor's there; maybe he's not dressed.  I'll let him know."

Anna still mounted the familiar staircase, not understanding what
the old man was saying.

"This way, to the left, if you please.  Excuse its not being
tidy.  His honor's in the old parlor now," the hall porter said,
panting.  "Excuse me, wait a little, your excellency; I'll just
see," he said, and overtaking her, he opened the high door and
disappeared behind it.  Anna stood still waiting.  "He's only
just awake," said the hall porter, coming out.  And at the very
instant the porter said this, Anna caught the sound of a childish
yawn.  From the sound of this yawn alone she knew her son and
seemed to see him living before her eyes.

"Let me in; go away!" she said, and went in through the high
doorway.  On the right of the door stood a bed, and sitting up in
the bed was the boy.  His little body bent forward with his
nightshirt unbuttoned, he was stretching and still yawning.  The
instant his lips came together they curved into a blissfully
sleepy smile, and with that smile he slowly and deliciously
rolled back again.

"Seryozha!" she whispered, going noiselessly up to him.

When she was parted from him, and all this latter time when she
had been feeling a fresh rush of love for him, she had pictured
him as he was at four years old, when she had loved him most of
all.  Now he was not even the same as when she had left him; he
was still further from the four-year-old baby, more grown and
thinner.  How thin his face was, how short his hair was!  What
long hands!  How he had changed since she left him!  But it was
he with his head, his lips, his soft neck and broad little
shoulders.

"Seryozha!" she repeated just in the child's ear.

He raised himself again on his elbow, turned his tangled head
from side to side as though looking for something, and opened his
eyes.  Slowly and inquiringly he looked for several seconds at
his mother standing motionless before him, then all at once he
smiled a blissful smile, and shutting his eyes, rolled not
backwards but towards her into her arms.

"Seryozha! my darling boy!" she said, breathing hard and putting
her arms round his plump little body.  "Mother!" he said,
wriggling about in her arms so as to touch her hands with
different parts of him.

Smiling sleepily still with closed eyes, he flung fat little arms
round her shoulders, rolled towards her, with the delicious
sleepy warmth and fragrance that is only found in children, and
began rubbing his face against her neck and shoulders.

"I know," he said, opening his eyes; "it's my birthday today.  I
knew you'd come.  I'll get up directly."

And saying that he dropped asleep.

Anna looked at him hungrily; she saw how he had grown and changed
in her absence.  She knew, and did not know, the bare legs so
long now, that were thrust out below the quilt, those
short-cropped curls on his neck in which she had so often kissed
him.  She touched all this and could say nothing; tears choked
her.

"What are you crying for, mother?" he said, waking completely up.
"Mother, what are you crying for?" he cried in a tearful voice.

"I won't cry...I'm crying for joy.  It's so long since I've seen
you.  I won't, I won't," she said, gulping down her tears and
turning away.  "Come, it's time for you to dress now," she added,
after a pause, and, never letting go his hands, she sat down by
his bedside on the chair, where his clothes were put ready for
him.

"How do you dress without me? How..." she tried to begin talking
simply and cheerfully, but she could not, and again she turned
away.

"I don't have a cold bath, papa didn't order it.  And you've not
seen Vassily Lukitch?  He'll come in soon.  Why, you're sitting
on my clothes!"

And Seryozha went off into a peal of laughter.  She looked at him
and smiled.

"Mother, darling, sweet one!" he shouted, flinging himself on her
again and hugging her.  It was as though only now, on seeing her
smile, he fully grasped what had happened.

"I don't want that on," he said, taking off her hat.  And as it
were, seeing her afresh without her hat, he fell to kissing her
again.

"But what did you think about me?  You didn't think I was dead?"

"I never believed it."

"You didn't believe it, my sweet?"

"I knew, I knew!" he repeated his favorite phrase, and snatching
the hand that was stroking his hair, he pressed the open palm to
his mouth and kissed it.



Chapter 30


Meanwhile Vassily Lukitch had not at first understood who this
lady was, and had learned from their conversation that it was no
other person than the mother who had left her husband, and whom
he had not seen, as he had entered the house after her departure.
He was in doubt whether to go in or not, or whether to
communicate with Alexey Alexandrovitch.  Reflecting finally that
his duty was to get Seryozha up at the hour fixed, and that it
was therefore not his business to consider who was there, the
mother or anyone else, but simply to do his duty, he finished
dressing, went to the door and opened it.

But the embraces of the mother and child, the sound of their
voices, and what they were saying, made him change his mind.

He shook his head, and with a sigh he closed the door.  "I'll
wait another ten minutes," he said to himself, clearing his
throat and wiping away tears.

Among the servants of the household there was intense excitement
all this time.  All had heard that their mistress had come, and
that Kapitonitch had let her in, and that she was even now in the
nursery, and that their master always went in person to the
nursery at nine o'clock, and every one fully comprehended that it
was impossible for the husband and wife to meet, and that they
must prevent it.  Korney, the valet, going down to the
hall porter's room, asked who had let her in, and how it was he
had done so, and ascertaining that Kapitonitch had admitted her
and shown her up, he gave the old man a talking-to.  The
hall porter was doggedly silent, but when Korney told him he
ought to be sent away, Kapitonitch darted up to him, and waving
his hands in Korney's face, began:

"Oh yes, to be sure you'd not have let her in!  After ten years'
service, and never a word but of kindness, and there you'd up and
say, 'Be off, go along, get away with you!'  Oh yes, you're a
shrewd one at politics, I dare say!  You don't need to be taught
how to swindle the master, and to filch fur coats!"

"Soldier!" said Korney contemptuously, and he turned to the nurse
who was coming in.  "Here, what do you think, Marya Efimovna: he
let her in without a word to anyone," Korney said addressing
her.  "Alexey Alexandrovitch will be down immediately--and go
into the nursery!"

"A pretty business, a pretty business!" said the nurse.  "You,
Korney Vassilievitch, you'd best keep him some way or other, the
master, while I'll run and get her away somehow.  A pretty
business!"

When the nurse went into the nursery, Seryozha was telling his
mother how he and Nadinka had had a fall in sledging downhill,
and had turned over three times.  She was listening to the sound
of his voice, watching his face and the play of expression on it,
touching his hand, but she did not follow what he was saying.
She must go, she must leave him,--this was the only thing she was
thinking and feeling.  She heard the steps of Vassily Lukitch
coming up to the door and coughing; she heard, too, the steps of
the nurse as she came near; but she sat like one turned to stone,
incapable of beginning to speak or to get up.

"Mistress, darling!" began the nurse, going up to Anna and
kissing her hands and shoulders.  "God has brought joy indeed to
our boy on his birthday.  You aren't changed one bit."

"Oh, nurse dear, I didn't know you were in the house," said Anna,
rousing herself for a moment.

"I'm not living here, I'm living with my daughter.  I came for
the birthday, Anna Arkadyevna, darling!"

The nurse suddenly burst into tears, and began kissing her hand
again.

Seryozha, with radiant eyes and smiles, holding his mother by one
hand and his nurse by the other, pattered on the rug with his fat
little bare feet.  The tenderness shown by his beloved nurse to
his mother threw him into an ecstasy.

"Mother!  She often comes to see me, and when she comes..." he
was beginning, but he stopped, noticing that the nurse was saying
something in a whisper to his mother, and that in his mother's
face there was a look of dread and something like shame, which
was so strangely unbecoming to her.

She went up to him.

"My sweet!" she said.

She could not say _good-bye_, but the expression on her face said
it, and he understood.  "Darling, darling Kootik!" she used the
name by which she had called him when he was little, "you won't
forget me?  You..." but she could not say more.

How often afterwards she thought of words she might have said.
But now she did not know how to say it, and could say nothing.
But Seryozha knew all she wanted to say to him.  He understood
that she was unhappy and loved him.  He understood even what the
nurse had whispered.  He had caught the words "always at nine
o'clock," and he knew that this was said of his father, and that
his father and mother could not meet.  That he understood, but
one thing he could not understand--why there should be a look of
dread and shame in her face?...  She was not in fault, but she
was afraid of him and ashamed of something.  He would have liked
to put a question that would have set at rest this doubt, but he
did not dare; he saw that she was miserable, and he felt for her.
Silently he pressed close to her and whispered, "Don't go yet.
He won't come just yet."

The mother held him away from her to see what he was thinking,
what to say to him, and in his frightened face she read not only
that he was speaking of his father, but, as it were, asking her
what he ought to think about his father.

"Seryozha, my darling," she said, "love him; he's better and
kinder than I am, and I have done him wrong.  When you grow up
you will judge."

"There's no one better than you!..." he cried in despair through
his tears, and, clutching her by the shoulders, he began
squeezing her with all his force to him, his arms trembling with
the strain.

"My sweet, my little one!" said Anna, and she cried as weakly and
childishly as he.

At that moment the door opened.  Vassily Lukitch came in.

At the other door there was the sound of steps, and the nurse in
a scared whisper said, "He's coming," and gave Anna her hat.

Seryozha sank onto the bed and sobbed, hiding his face in his
hands.  Anna removed his hands, once more kissed his wet face,
and with rapid steps went to the door.  Alexey Alexandrovitch
walked in, meeting her.  Seeing her, he stopped short and bowed
his head.

Although she had just said he was better and kinder than she, in
the rapid glance she flung at him, taking in his whole figure in
all its details, feelings of repulsion and hatred for him and
jealousy over her son took possession of her.  With a swift
gesture she put down her veil, and, quickening her pace, almost
ran out of the room.

She had not time to undo, and so carried back with her, the
parcel of toys she had chosen the day before in a toy shop with
such love and sorrow.



Chapter 31


As intensely as Anna had longed to see her son, and long as she
had been thinking of it and preparing herself for it, she had
not in the least expected that seeing him would affect her so
deeply.  On getting back to her lonely rooms in the hotel she
could not for a long while understand why she was there.  "Yes,
it's all over, and I am again alone," she said to herself, and
without taking off her hat she sat down in a low chair by the
hearth.  Fixing her eyes on a bronze clock standing on a table
between the windows, she tried to think.

The French maid brought from abroad came in to suggest she should
dress.  She gazed at her wonderingly and said, "Presently." A
footman offered her coffee.  "Later on," she said.

The Italian nurse, after having taken the baby out in her best,
came in with her, and brought her to Anna.  The plump, well-fed
little baby, on seeing her mother, as she always did, held out
her fat little hands, and with a smile on her toothless mouth,
began, like a fish with a float, bobbing her fingers up and down
the starched folds of her embroidered skirt, making them rustle.
It was impossible not to smile, not to kiss the baby, impossible
not to hold out a finger for her to clutch, crowing and prancing
all over; impossible not to offer her a lip which she sucked into
her little mouth by way of a kiss.  And all this Anna did, and
took her in her arms and made her dance, and kissed her fresh
little cheek and bare little elbows; but at the sight of this
child it was plainer than ever to her that the feeling she had
for her could not be called love in comparison with what she felt
for Seryozha.  Everything in this baby was charming, but for some
reason all this did not go deep to her heart.  On her first
child, though the child of an unloved father, had been
concentrated all the love that had never found satisfaction.  Her
baby girl had been born in the most painful circumstances and had
not had a hundredth part of the care and thought which had been
concentrated on her first child.  Besides, in the little girl
everything was still in the future, while Seryozha was by now
almost a personality, and a personality dearly loved.  In him
there was a conflict of thought and feeling; he understood her,
he loved her, he judged her, she thought, recalling his words and
his eyes.  And she was forever--not physically only but
spiritually--divided from him, and it was impossible to set this
right.

She gave the baby back to the nurse, let her go, and opened the
locket in which there was Seryozha's portrait when he was almost
of the same age as the girl.  She got up, and, taking off her
hat, took up from a little table an album in which there were
photographs of her son at different ages.  She wanted to compare
them, and began taking them out of the album.  She took them all
out except one, the latest and best photograph.  In it he was in
a white smock, sitting astride a chair, with frowning eyes and
smiling lips.  It was his best, most characteristic expression.
With her little supple hands, her white, delicate fingers, that
moved with a peculiar intensity today, she pulled at a corner of
the photograph, but the photograph had caught somewhere, and she
could not get it out.  There was no paper knife on the table, and
so, pulling out the photograph that was next to her son's (it was
a photograph of Vronsky taken at Rome in a round hat and with
long hair), she used it to push out her son's photograph.  "Oh,
here is he!" she said, glancing at the portrait of Vronsky, and
she suddenly recalled that he was the cause of her present
misery.  She had not once thought of him all the morning.  But
now, coming all at once upon that manly, noble face, so familiar
and so dear to her, she felt a sudden rush of love for him.

"But where is he?  How is it he leaves me alone in my misery?"
she thought all at once with a feeling of reproach, forgetting
she had herself kept from him everything concerning her son.  She
sent to ask him to come to her immediately; with a throbbing
heart she awaited him, rehearsing to herself the words in which
she would tell him all, and the expressions of love with which he
would console her.  The messenger returned with the answer that
he had a visitor with him, but that he would come immediately,
and that he asked whether she would let him bring with him Prince
Yashvin, who had just arrived in Petersburg.  "He's not coming
alone, and since dinner yesterday he has not seen me," she
thought; "he's not coming so that I could tell him everything,
but coming with Yashvin."  And all at once a strange idea came to
her: what if he had ceased to love her?

And going over the events of the last few days, it seemed to her
that she saw in everything a confirmation of this terrible idea.
The fact that he had not dined at home yesterday, and the fact
that he had insisted on their taking separate sets of rooms in
Petersburg, and that even now he was not coming to her alone, as
though he were trying to avoid meeting her face to face.

"But he ought to tell me so.  I must know that it is so.  If I
knew it, then I know what I should do," she said to herself,
utterly unable to picture to herself the position she would be in
if she were convinced of his not caring for her.  She thought he
had ceased to love her, she felt close upon despair, and
consequently she felt exceptionally alert.  She rang for her maid
and went to her dressing room.  As she dressed, she took more
care over her appearance than she had done all those days, as
though he might, if he had grown cold to her, fall in love with
her again because she had dressed and arranged her hair in the
way most becoming to her.

She heard the bell ring before she was ready.  When she went into
the drawing room it was not he, but Yashvin, who met her eyes.
Vronsky was looking through the photographs of her son, which she
had forgotten on the table, and he made no haste to look round at
her.

"We have met already," she said, putting her little hand into the
huge hand of Yashvin, whose bashfulness was so queerly out of
keeping with his immense frame and coarse face.  "We met last
year at the races.  Give them to me," she said, with a rapid
movement snatching from Vronsky the photographs of her son, and
glancing significantly at him with flashing eyes.  "Were the
races good this year?  Instead of them I saw the races in the
Corso in Rome.  But you don't care for life abroad," she said
with a cordial smile.  "I know you and all your tastes, though I
have seen so little of you."

"I'm awfully sorry for that, for my tastes are mostly bad," said
Yashvin, gnawing at his left mustache.

Having talked a little while, and noticing that Vronsky glanced
at the clock, Yashvin asked her whether she would be staying much
longer in Petersburg, and unbending his huge figure reached after
his cap.

"Not long, I think," she said hesitatingly, glancing at Vronsky.

"So then we shan't meet again?"

"Come and dine with me," said Anna resolutely, angry it seemed
with herself for her embarrassment, but flushing as she always
did when she defined her position before a fresh person.  "The
dinner here is not good, but at least you will see him.  There is
no one of his old friends in the regiment Alexey cares for as he
does for you."

"Delighted," said Yashvin with a smile, from which Vronsky could
see that he liked Anna very much.

Yashvin said good-bye and went away; Vronsky stayed behind.

"Are you going too?" she said to him.

"I'm late already," he answered.  "Run along!  I'll catch you up
in a moment," he called to Yashvin.

She took him by the hand, and without taking her eyes off him,
gazed at him while she ransacked her mind for the words to say
that would keep him.

"Wait a minute, there's something I want to say to you," and
taking his broad hand she pressed it on her neck.  "Oh, was it
right my asking him to dinner?"

"You did quite right," he said with a serene smile that showed
his even teeth, and he kissed her hand.

"Alexey, you have not changed to me?" she said, pressing his hand
in both of hers.  "Alexey, I am miserable here.  When are we
going away?"

"Soon, soon.  You wouldn't believe how disagreeable our way of
living here is to me too," he said, and he drew away his hand.

"Well, go, go!" she said in a tone of offense, and she walked
quickly away from him.



Chapter 32


When Vronsky returned home, Anna was not yet home.  Soon after he
had left, some lady, so they told him, had come to see her, and
she had gone out with her.  That she had gone out without leaving
word where she was going, that she had not yet come back, and
that all the morning she had been going about somewhere without a
word to him--all this, together with the strange look of
excitement in her face in the morning, and the recollection of
the hostile tone with which she had before Yashvin almost
snatched her son's photographs out of his hands, made him
serious.  He decided he absolutely must speak openly with her.
And he waited for her in her drawing room.  But Anna did not
return alone, but brought with her her old unmarried aunt,
Princess Oblonskaya.  This was the lady who had come in the
morning, and with whom Anna had gone out shopping.  Anna appeared
not to notice Vronsky's worried and inquiring expression, and
began a lively account of her morning's shopping.  He saw that
there was something working within her; in her flashing eyes,
when they rested for a moment on him, there was an intense
concentration, and in her words and movements there was that
nervous rapidity and grace which, during the early period of
their intimacy, had so fascinated him, but which now so disturbed
and alarmed him.

The dinner was laid for four.  All were gathered together and
about to go into the little dining room when Tushkevitch made his
appearance with a message from Princess Betsy.  Princess Betsy
begged her to excuse her not having come to say good-bye; she had
been indisposed, but begged Anna to come to her between half-past
six and nine o'clock.  Vronsky glanced at Anna at the precise
limit of time, so suggestive of steps having been taken that she
should meet no one; but Anna appeared not to notice it.

"Very sorry that I can't come just between half-past six and
nine," she said with a faint smile.

"The princess will be very sorry."

"And so am I."

"You're going, no doubt, to hear Patti?" said Tushkevitch.

"Patti?  You suggest the idea to me.  I would go if it were
possible to get a box."

"I can get one," Tushkevitch offered his services.

"I should be very, very grateful to you," said Anna.  "But won't
you dine with us?"

Vronsky gave a hardly perceptible shrug.  He was at a complete
loss to understand what Anna was about.  What had she brought the
old Princess Oblonskaya home for, what had she made Tushkevitch
stay to dinner for, and, most amazing of all, why was she sending
him for a box?  Could she possibly think in her position of going
to Patti's benefit, where all the circle of her acquaintances
would be?  He looked at her with serious eyes, but she responded
with that defiant, half-mirthful, half-desperate look, the
meaning of which he could not comprehend.  At dinner Anna was in
aggressively high spirits--she almost flirted both with
Tushkevitch and with Yashvin.  When they got up from dinner and
Tushkevitch had gone to get a box at the opera, Yashvin went to
smoke, and Vronsky went down with him to his own rooms.  After
sitting there for some time he ran upstairs.  Anna was already
dressed in a low-necked gown of light silk and velvet that she
had had made in Paris, and with costly white lace on her head,
framing her face, and particularly becoming, showing up her
dazzling beauty.

"Are you really going to the theater?" he said, trying not to
look at her.

"Why do you ask with such alarm?" she said, wounded again at his
not looking at her.  "Why shouldn't I go?"

She appeared not to understand the motive of his words.

"Oh, of course, there's no reason whatever," he said, frowning.

"That's just what I say," she said, willfully refusing to see the
irony of his tone, and quietly turning back her long, perfumed
glove.

"Anna, for God's sake! what is the matter with you?" he said,
appealing to her exactly as once her husband had done.

"I don't understand what you are asking."

"You know that it's out of the question to go."

"Why so?  I'm not going alone.  Princess Varvara has gone to
dress, she is going with me."

He shrugged his shoulders with an air of perplexity and despair.

"But do you mean to say you don't know?..." he began.

"But I don't care to know!" she almost shrieked.  "I don't care
to.  Do I regret what I have done?  No, no, no!  If it were all
to do again from the beginning, it would be the same.  For us,
for you and for me, there is only one thing that matters, whether
we love each other.  Other people we need not consider.  Why are
we living here apart and not seeing each other?  Why can't I go?
I love you, and I don't care for anything," she said in Russian,
glancing at him with a peculiar gleam in her eyes that he could
not understand.  "If you have not changed to me, why don't you
look at me?"

He looked at her.  He saw all the beauty of her face and full
dress, always so becoming to her.  But now her beauty and
elegance were just what irritated him.

"My feeling cannot change, you know, but I beg you, I entreat
you," he said again in French, with a note of tender supplication
in his voice, but with coldness in his eyes.

She did not hear his words, but she saw the coldness of his eyes,
and answered with irritation:

"And I beg you to explain why I should not go."

"Because it might cause you..." he hesitated.

"I don't understand.  Yashvin _n'est pas compromettant_, and
Princess Varvara is no worse than others.  Oh, here she is!"



Chapter 33


Vronsky for the first time experienced a feeling of anger against
Anna, almost a hatred for her willfully refusing to understand
her own position.  This feeling was aggravated by his being
unable to tell her plainly the cause of his anger.  If he had
told her directly what he was thinking, he would have said:

"In that dress, with a princess only too well known to everyone,
to show yourself at the theater is equivalent not merely to
acknowledging your position as a fallen woman, but is flinging
down a challenge to society, that is to say, cutting yourself off
from it forever."

He could not say that to her.  "But how can she fail to see it,
and what is going on in her?" he said to himself.  He felt at the
same time that his respect for her was diminished while his sense
of her beauty was intensified.

He went back scowling to his rooms, and sitting down beside
Yashvin, who, with his long legs stretched out on a chair, was
drinking brandy and seltzer water, he ordered a glass of the same
for himself.

"You were talking of Lankovsky's Powerful.  That's a fine horse,
and I would advise you to buy him," said Yashvin, glancing at
his comrade's gloomy face.  "His hind-quarters aren't quite
first-rate, but the legs and head--one couldn't wish for anything
better."

"I think I will take him," answered Vronsky.

Their conversation about horses interested him, but he did not
for an instant forget Anna, and could not help listening to the
sound of steps in the corridor and looking at the clock on the
chimney piece.

"Anna Arkadyevna gave orders to announce that she has gone to the
theater."

Yashvin, tipping another glass of brandy into the bubbling water,
drank it and got up, buttoning his coat.

"Well, let's go," he said, faintly smiling under his mustache,
and showing by this smile that he knew the cause of Vronsky's
gloominess, and did not attach any significance to it.

"I'm not going," Vronsky answered gloomily.

"Well, I must, I promised to.  Good-bye, then.  If you do, come
to the stalls; you can take Kruzin's stall," added Yashvin as he
went out.

"No, I'm busy."

"A wife is a care, but it's worse when she's not a wife," thought
Yashvin, as he walked out of the hotel.

Vronsky, left alone, got up from his chair and began pacing up
and down the room.

"And what's today?  The fourth night....  Yegor and his wife are
there, and my mother, most likely.  Of course all Petersburg's
there.  Now she's gone in, taken off her cloak and come into the
light.  Tushkevitch, Yashvin, Princess Varvara," he pictured them
to himself....  "What about me?  Either that I'm frightened or
have given up to Tushkevitch the right to protect her?  From
every point of view--stupid, stupid!...  And why is she putting
me in such a position?" he said with a gesture of despair.

With that gesture he knocked against the table, on which there
was standing the seltzer water and the decanter of brandy, and
almost upset it.  He tried to catch it, let it slip, and angrily
kicked the table over and rang.

"If you care to be in my service," he said to the valet who came
in, "you had better remember your duties.  This shouldn't be
here.  You ought to have cleared away."

The valet, conscious of his own innocence, would have defended
himself, but glancing at his master, he saw from his face that
the only thing to do was to be silent, and hurriedly threading
his way in and out, dropped down on the carpet and began
gathering up the whole and broken glasses and bottles.

"That's not your duty; send the waiter to clear away, and get my
dress coat out."


Vronsky went into the theater at half-past eight.  The
performance was in full swing.  The little old box-keeper,
recognizing Vronsky as he helped him off with his fur coat,
called him "Your Excellency," and suggested he should not take a
number but should simply call Fyodor.  In the brightly lighted
corridor there was no one but the box-opener and two attendants
with fur cloaks on their arms listening at the doors.  Through
the closed doors came the sounds of the discreet _staccato_
accompaniment of the orchestra, and a single female voice
rendering distinctly a musical phrase.  The door opened to let
the box-opener slip through, and the phrase drawing to the end
reached Vronsky's hearing clearly.  But the doors were closed
again at once, and Vronsky did not hear the end of the phrase and
the cadence of the accompaniment, though he knew from the thunder
of applause that it was over.  When he entered the hall,
brilliantly lighted with chandeliers and gas jets, the noise was
still going on.  On the stage the singer, bowing and smiling,
with bare shoulders flashing with diamonds, was, with the help of
the tenor who had given her his arm, gathering up the bouquets
that were flying awkwardly over the footlights.  Then she went up
to a gentleman with glossy pomaded hair parted down the center,
who was stretching across the footlights holding out something to
her, and all the public in the stalls as well as in the boxes was
in excitement, craning forward, shouting and clapping.  The
conductor in his high chair assisted in passing the offering, and
straightened his white tie.  Vronsky walked into the middle of
the stalls, and, standing still, began looking about him.  That
day less than ever was his attention turned upon the familiar,
habitual surroundings, the stage, the noise, all the familiar,
uninteresting, particolored herd of spectators in the packed
theater.

There were, as always, the same ladies of some sort with officers
of some sort in the back of the boxes; the same gaily dressed
women--God knows who--and uniforms and black coats; the same
dirty crowd in the upper gallery; and among the crowd, in the
boxes and in the front rows, were some forty of the _real_ people.
And to those oases Vronsky at once directed his attention, and
with them he entered at once into relation.

The act was over when he went in, and so he did not go straight
to his brother's box, but going up to the first row of stalls
stopped at the footlights with Serpuhovskoy, who, standing with
one knee raised and his heel on the footlights, caught sight of
him in the distance and beckoned to him, smiling.

Vronsky had not yet seen Anna.  He purposely avoided looking in
her direction.  But he knew by the direction of people's eyes
where she was.  He looked round discreetly, but he was not
seeking her; expecting the worst, his eyes sought for Alexey
Alexandrovitch.  To his relief Alexey Alexandrovitch was not in
the theater that evening.

"How little of the military man there is left in you!"
Serpuhovskoy was saying to him.  "A diplomat, an artist,
something of that sort, one would say."

"Yes, it was like going back home when I put on a black coat,"
answered Vronsky, smiling and slowly taking out his opera glass.

"Well, I'll own I envy you there.  When I come back from abroad
and put on this," he touched his epaulets, "I regret my
freedom."

Serpuhovskoy had long given up all hope of Vronsky's career, but
he liked him as before, and was now particularly cordial to him.

"What a pity you were not in time for the first act!"

Vronsky, listening with one ear, moved his opera glass from the
stalls and scanned the boxes.  Near a lady in a turban and a bald
old man, who seemed to wave angrily in the moving opera glass,
Vronsky suddenly caught sight of Anna's head, proud, strikingly
beautiful, and smiling in the frame of lace.  She was in the
fifth box, twenty paces from him.  She was sitting in front, and
slightly turning, was saying something to Yashvin.  The setting
of her head on her handsome, broad shoulders, and the restrained
excitement and brilliance of her eyes and her whole face reminded
him of her just as he had seen her at the ball in Moscow.  But he
felt utterly different towards her beauty now.  In his feeling
for her now there was no element of mystery, and so her beauty,
though it attracted him even more intensely than before, gave him
now a sense of injury.  She was not looking in his direction, but
Vronsky felt that she had seen him already.

When Vronsky turned the opera glass again in that direction, he
noticed that Princess Varvara was particularly red, and kept
laughing unnaturally and looking round at the next box.  Anna,
folding her fan and tapping it on the red velvet, was gazing away
and did not see, and obviously did not wish to see, what was
taking place in the next box.  Yashvin's face wore the expression
which was common when he was losing at cards.  Scowling, he
sucked the left end of his mustache further and further into his
mouth, and cast sidelong glances at the next box.

In that box on the left were the Kartasovs.  Vronsky knew them,
and knew that Anna was acquainted with them.  Madame Kartasova, a
thin little woman, was standing up in her box, and, her back
turned upon Anna, she was putting on a mantle that her husband
