was holding for her.  Her face was pale and angry, and she was
talking excitedly.  Kartasov, a fat, bald man, was continually
looking round at Anna, while he attempted to soothe his wife.
When the wife had gone out, the husband lingered a long while,
and tried to catch Anna's eye, obviously anxious to bow to her.
But Anna, with unmistakable intention, avoided noticing him, and
talked to Yashvin, whose cropped head was bent down to her.
Kartasov went out without making his salutation, and the box was
left empty.

Vronsky could not understand exactly what had passed between the
Kartasovs and Anna, but he saw that something humiliating for
Anna had happened.  He knew this both from what he had seen, and
most of all from the face of Anna, who, he could see, was taxing
every nerve to carry through the part she had taken up.  And in
maintaining this attitude of external composure she was
completely successful.  Anyone who did not know her and her
circle, who had not heard all the utterances of the women
expressive of commiseration, indignation, and amazement, that she
should show herself in society, and show herself so conspicuously
with her lace and her beauty, would have admired the serenity and
loveliness of this woman without a suspicion that she was
undergoing the sensations of a man in the stocks.

Knowing that something had happened, but not knowing precisely
what, Vronsky felt a thrill of agonizing anxiety, and hoping to
find out something, he went towards his brother's box.  Purposely
choosing the way round furthest from Anna's box, he jostled as he
came out against the colonel of his old regiment talking to two
acquaintances.  Vronsky heard the name of Madame Karenina, and
noticed how the colonel hastened to address Vronsky loudly by
name, with a meaning glance at his companions.

"Ah, Vronsky!  When are you coming to the regiment?  We can't let
you off without a supper.  You're one of the old set," said the
colonel of his regiment.

"I can't stop, awfully sorry, another time," said Vronsky, and
he ran upstairs towards his brother's box.

The old countess, Vronsky's mother, with her steel-gray curls,
was in his brother's box.  Varya with the young Princess Sorokina
met him in the corridor.

Leaving the Princess Sorokina with her mother, Varya held out her
hand to her brother-in-law, and began immediately to speak of
what interested him.  She was more excited than he had ever seen
her.

"I think it's mean and hateful, and Madame Kartasova had no
right to do it.  Madame Karenina..." she began.

"But what is it?  I don't know."

"What? you've not heard?"

"You know I should be the last person to hear of it."

"There isn't a more spiteful creature than that Madame
Kartasova!"

"But what did she do?"

"My husband told me....  She has insulted Madame Karenina.  Her
husband began talking to her across the box, and Madame Kartasova
made a scene.  She said something aloud, he says, something
insulting, and went away."

"Count, your maman is asking for you," said the young Princess
Sorokina, peeping out of the door of the box.

"I've been expecting you all the while," said his mother, smiling
sarcastically.  "You were nowhere to be seen."

Her son saw that she could not suppress a smile of delight.

"Good evening, maman.  I have come to you," he said coldly.

"Why aren't you going to _faire la cour à Madame Karenina_?" she
went on, when Princess Sorokina had moved away.  "_Elle fait
sensation.  On oublie la Patti pour elle_."

"Maman, I have asked you not to say anything to me of that," he
answered, scowling.

"I'm only saying what everyone's saying."

Vronsky made no reply, and saying a few words to Princess
Sorokina, he went away.  At the door he met his brother.

"Ah, Alexey!" said his brother.  "How disgusting!  Idiot of a
woman, nothing else....  I wanted to go straight to her.  Let's
go together."

Vronsky did not hear him.  With rapid steps he went downstairs;
he felt that he must do something, but he did not know what.
Anger with her for having put herself and him in such a false
position, together with pity for her suffering, filled his heart.
He went down, and made straight for Anna's box.  At her box stood
Stremov, talking to her.

"There are no more tenors.  _Le moule en est brisé!_"

Vronsky bowed to her and stopped to greet Stremov.

"You came in late, I think, and have missed the best song," Anna
said to Vronsky, glancing ironically, he thought, at him.

"I am a poor judge of music," he said, looking sternly at her.

"Like Prince Yashvin," she said smiling, "who considers that
Patti sings too loud."

"Thank you," she said, her little hand in its long glove taking
the playbill Vronsky picked up, and suddenly at that instant her
lovely face quivered.  She got up and went into the interior of
the box.

Noticing in the next act that her box was empty, Vronsky, rousing
indignant "hushes" in the silent audience, went out in the middle
of a solo and drove home.

Anna was already at home.  When Vronsky went up to her, she was
in the same dress as she had worn at the theater.  She was
sitting in the first armchair against the wall, looking straight
before her.  She looked at him, and at once resumed her former
position.

"Anna," he said.

"You, you are to blame for everything!" she cried, with tears of
despair and hatred in her voice, getting up.

"I begged, I implored you not to go, I knew it would be
unpleasant...."

"Unpleasant!" she cried--"hideous!  As long as I live I shall
never forget it.  She said it was a disgrace to sit beside me."

"A silly woman's chatter," he said: "but why risk it, why
provoke?..."

"I hate your calm.  You ought not to have brought me to this.  If
you had loved me..."

"Anna!  How does the question of my love come in?"

"Oh, if you loved me, as I love, if you were tortured as I
am!..." she said, looking at him with an expression of terror.

He was sorry for her, and angry notwithstanding.  He assured her
of his love because he saw that this was the only means of
soothing her, and he did not reproach her in words, but in his
heart he reproached her.

And the asseverations of his love, which seemed to him so vulgar
that he was ashamed to utter them, she drank in eagerly, and
gradually became calmer.  The next day, completely reconciled,
they left for the country.




PART 6




Chapter 1



Darya Alexandrovna spent the summer with her children at
Pokrovskoe, at her sister Kitty Levin's.  The house on her own
estate was quite in ruins, and Levin and his wife had persuaded
her to spend the summer with them.  Stepan Arkadyevitch greatly
approved of the arrangement.  He said he was very sorry his
official duties prevented him from spending the summer in the
country with his family, which would have been the greatest
happiness for him; and remaining in Moscow, he came down to the
country from time to time for a day or two.  Besides the
Oblonskys, with all their children and their governess, the old
princess too came to stay that summer with the Levins, as she
considered it her duty to watch over her inexperienced daughter in
her _interesting condition_.  Moreover, Varenka, Kitty's friend
abroad, kept her promise to come to Kitty when she was married,
and stayed with her friend.  All of these were friends or
relations of Levin's wife.  And though he liked them all, he
rather regretted his own Levin world and ways, which was
smothered by this influx of the "Shtcherbatsky element," as he
called it to himself.  Of his own relations there stayed with him
only Sergey Ivanovitch, but he too was a man of the Koznishev and
not the Levin stamp, so that the Levin spirit was utterly
obliterated.

In the Levins' house, so long deserted, there were now so many
people that almost all the rooms were occupied, and almost every
day it happened that the old princess, sitting down to table,
counted them all over, and put the thirteenth grandson or
granddaughter at a separate table.  And Kitty, with her careful
housekeeping, had no little trouble to get all the chickens,
turkeys, and geese, of which so many were needed to satisfy the
summer appetites of the visitors and children.

The whole family were sitting at dinner.  Dolly's children, with
their governess and Varenka, were making plans for going to look
for mushrooms.  Sergey Ivanovitch, who was looked up to by all
the party for his intellect and learning, with a respect that
almost amounted to awe, surprised everyone by joining in the
conversation about mushrooms.

"Take me with you.  I am very fond of picking mushrooms," he
said, looking at Varenka; "I think it's a very nice occupation."

"Oh, we shall be delighted," answered Varenka, coloring a little.
Kitty exchanged meaningful glances with Dolly.  The proposal of
the learned and intellectual Sergey Ivanovitch to go looking for
mushrooms with Varenka confirmed certain theories of Kitty's with
which her mind had been very busy of late.  She made haste to
address some remark to her mother, so that her look should not be
noticed.  After dinner Sergey Ivanovitch sat with his cup of
coffee at the drawing-room window, and while he took part in a
conversation he had begun with his brother, he watched the door
through which the children would start on the mushroom-picking
expedition.  Levin was sitting in the window near his brother.

Kitty stood beside her husband, evidently awaiting the end of a
conversation that had no interest for her, in order to tell him
something.

"You have changed in many respects since your marriage, and for
the better," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling to Kitty, and
obviously little interested in the conversation, "but you have
remained true to your passion for defending the most paradoxical
theories."

"Katya, it's not good for you to stand," her husband said to her,
putting a chair for her and looking significantly at her.

"Oh, and there's no time either," added Sergey Ivanovitch, seeing
the children running out.

At the head of them all Tanya galloped sideways, in her tightly-
drawn stockings, and waving a basket and Sergey Ivanovitch's hat,
she ran straight up to him.

Boldly running up to Sergey Ivanovitch with shining eyes, so like
her father's fine eyes, she handed him his hat and made as though
she would put it on for him, softening her freedom by a shy and
friendly smile.

"Varenka's waiting," she said, carefully putting his hat on,
seeing from Sergey Ivanovitch's smile that she might do so.

Varenka was standing at the door, dressed in a yellow print gown,
with a white kerchief on her head.

"I'm coming, I'm coming, Varvara Andreevna," said Sergey
Ivanovitch, finishing his cup of coffee, and putting into their
separate pockets his handkerchief and cigar-case.

"And how sweet my Varenka is! eh?" said Kitty to her husband, as
soon as Sergey Ivanovitch rose.  She spoke so that Sergey
Ivanovitch could hear, and it was clear that she meant him to do
so.  "And how good-looking she is--such a refined beauty!
Varenka!" Kitty shouted.  "Shall you be in the mill copse?  We'll
come out to you."

"You certainly forget your condition, Kitty," said the old
princess, hurriedly coming out at the door.  "You mustn't shout
like that."

Varenka, hearing Kitty's voice and her mother's reprimand, went
with light, rapid steps up to Kitty.  The rapidity of her
movement, her flushed and eager face, everything betrayed that
something out of the common was going on in her.  Kitty knew what
this was, and had been watching her intently.  She called Varenka
at that moment merely in order mentally to give her a blessing
for the important event which, as Kitty fancied, was bound to
come to pass that day after dinner in the wood.

"Varenka, I should be very happy if a certain something were to
happen," she whispered as she kissed her.

"And are you coming with us?" Varenka said to Levin in confusion,
pretending not to have heard what had been said.

"I am coming, but only as far as the threshing-floor, and there I
shall stop."

"Why, what do you want there?" said Kitty.

"I must go to have a look at the new wagons, and to check the
invoice," said Levin; "and where will you be?"

"On the terrace."



Chapter 2


On the terrace were assembled all the ladies of the party.  They
always liked sitting there after dinner, and that day they had
work to do there too.  Besides the sewing and knitting of
baby clothes, with which all of them were busy, that afternoon
jam was being made on the terrace by a method new to Agafea
Mihalovna, without the addition of water.  Kitty had introduced
this new method, which had been in use in her home.  Agafea
Mihalovna, to whom the task of jam-making had always been
intrusted, considering that what had been done in the Levin
household could not be amiss, had nevertheless put water with the
strawberries, maintaining that the jam could not be made without
it.  She had been caught in the act, and was now making jam
before everyone, and it was to be proved to her conclusively that
jam could be very well made without water.

Agafea Mihalovna, her face heated and angry, her hair untidy, and
her thin arms bare to the elbows, was turning the preserving-pan
over the charcoal stove, looking darkly at the raspberries and
devoutly hoping they would stick and not cook properly.  The
princess, conscious that Agafea Mihalovna's wrath must be chiefly
directed against her, as the person responsible for the raspberry
jam-making, tried to appear to be absorbed in other things and
not interested in the jam, talked of other matters, but cast
stealthy glances in the direction of the stove.

"I always buy my maids' dresses myself, of some cheap material,"
the princess said, continuing the previous conversation.  "Isn't
it time to skim it, my dear?" she added, addressing Agafea
Mihalovna.  "There's not the slightest need for you to do it, and
it's hot for you," she said, stopping Kitty.

"I'll do it," said Dolly, and getting up, she carefully passed
the spoon over the frothing sugar, and from time to time shook
off the clinging jam from the spoon by knocking it on a plate
that was covered with yellow-red scum and blood-colored syrup.
"How they'll enjoy this at tea-time!" she thought of her
children, remembering how she herself as a child had wondered how
it was the grown-up people did not eat what was best of all--the
scum of the jam.

"Stiva says it's much better to give money." Dolly took up
meanwhile the weighty subject under discussion, what presents
should be made to servants.  "But..."

"Money's out of the question!" the princess and Kitty exclaimed
with one voice.  "They appreciate a present..."

"Well, last year, for instance, I bought our Matrona Semyenovna,
not a poplin, but something of that sort," said the princess.

"I remember she was wearing it on your nameday."

"A charming pattern--so simple and refined,--I should have liked
it myself, if she hadn't had it.  Something like Varenka's.  So
pretty and inexpensive."

"Well, now I think it's done," said Dolly, dropping the syrup
from the spoon.

"When it sets as it drops, it's ready.  Cook it a little longer,
Agafea Mihalovna."

"The flies!" said Agafea Mihalovna angrily.  "It'll be just the
same," she added.

"Ah! how sweet it is! don't frighten it!" Kitty said suddenly,
looking at a sparrow that had settled on the step and was pecking
at the center of a raspberry.

"Yes, but you keep a little further from the stove," said her
mother.

"_À propos de Varenka_," said Kitty, speaking in French, as they
had been doing all the while, so that Agafea Mihalovna should not
understand them, "you know, mamma, I somehow expect things to be
settled today.  You know what I mean.  How splendid it would be!"

"But what a famous matchmaker she is!" said Dolly.  "How
carefully and cleverly she throws them together!..."

"No; tell me, mamma, what do you think?"

"Why, what is one to think? He" (_he_ meant Sergey Ivanovitch)
"might at any time have been a match for anyone in Russia; now,
of course, he's not quite a young man, still I know ever so many
girls would be glad to marry him even now....  She's a very nice
girl, but he might..."

"Oh, no, mamma, do understand why, for him and for her too,
nothing better could be imagined.  In the first place, she's
charming!" said Kitty, crooking one of her fingers.

"He thinks her very attractive, that's certain," assented Dolly.

"Then he occupies such a position in society that he has no need
to look for either fortune or position in his wife.  All he needs
is a good, sweet wife--a restful one."

"Well, with her he would certainly be restful," Dolly assented.

"Thirdly, that she should love him.  And so it is...that is,
it would be so splendid!...I look forward to seeing them
coming out of the forest--and everything settled.  I shall see at
once by their eyes.  I should be so delighted!  What do you
think, Dolly?"

"But don't excite yourself.  It's not at all the thing for you to
be excited," said her mother.

"Oh, I'm not excited, mamma.  I fancy he will make her an offer
today."

"Ah, that's so strange, how and when a man makes an offer!...
There is a sort of barrier, and all at once it's broken down,"
said Dolly, smiling pensively and recalling her past with Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

"Mamma, how did papa make you an offer?" Kitty asked suddenly.

"There was nothing out of the way, it was very simple," answered
the princess, but her face beamed all over at the recollection.

"Oh, but how was it?  You loved him, anyway, before you were
allowed to speak?"

Kitty felt a peculiar pleasure in being able now to talk to her
mother on equal terms about those questions of such paramount
interest in a woman's life.

"Of course I did; he had come to stay with us in the country."

"But how was it settled between you, mamma?"

"You imagine, I dare say, that you invented something quite new?
It's always just the same: it was settled by the eyes, by
smiles..."

"How nicely you said that, mamma!  It's just by the eyes, by
smiles that it's done," Dolly assented.

"But what words did he say?"

"What did Kostya say to you?"

"He wrote it in chalk.  It was wonderful....  How long ago it
seems!" she said.

And the three women all fell to musing on the same thing.  Kitty
was the first to break the silence.  She remembered all that last
winter before her marriage, and her passion for Vronsky.

"There's one thing ...that old love affair of Varenka's," she
said, a natural chain of ideas bringing her to this point.  "I
should have liked to say something to Sergey Ivanovitch, to
prepare him.  They're all--all men, I mean," she added, "awfully
jealous over our past."

"Not all," said Dolly.  "You judge by your own husband.  It makes
him miserable even now to remember Vronsky.  Eh? that's true,
isn't it?"

"Yes," Kitty answered, a pensive smile in her eyes.

"But I really don't know," the mother put in in defense of her
motherly care of her daughter, "what there was in your past that
could worry him?  That Vronsky paid you attentions--that happens
to every girl."

"Oh, yes, but we didn't mean that," Kitty said, flushing a
little.

"No, let me speak," her mother went on, "why, you yourself would
not let me have a talk to Vronsky.  Don't you remember?"

"Oh, mamma!" said Kitty, with an expression of suffering.

"There's no keeping you young people in check nowadays....  Your
friendship could not have gone beyond what was suitable.  I
should myself have called upon him to explain himself.  But, my
darling, it's not right for you to be agitated.  Please remember
that, and calm yourself."

"I'm perfectly calm, maman."

"How happy it was for Kitty that Anna came then," said Dolly,
"and how unhappy for her.  It turned out quite the opposite," she
said, struck by her own ideas.  "Then Anna was so happy, and
Kitty thought herself unhappy.  Now it is just the opposite.  I
often think of her."

"A nice person to think about!  Horrid, repulsive woman--no
heart," said her mother, who could not forget that Kitty had
married not Vronsky, but Levin.

"What do you want to talk of it for?" Kitty said with annoyance.
"I never think about it, and I don't want to think of it....
And I don't want to think of it," she said, catching the sound of
her husband's well-known step on the steps of the terrace.

"What's that you don't want to think about?" inquired Levin,
coming onto the terrace.

But no one answered him, and he did not repeat the question.

"I'm sorry I've broken in on your feminine parliament," he said,
looking round on every one discontentedly, and perceiving that
they had been talking of something which they would not talk
about before him.

For a second he felt that he was sharing the feeling of Agafea
Mihalovna, vexation at their making jam without water, and
altogether at the outside Shtcherbatsky element.  He smiled,
however, and went up to Kitty.

"Well, how are you?" he asked her, looking at her with the
expression with which everyone looked at her now.

"Oh, very well," said Kitty, smiling, "and how have things gone
with you?"

"The wagons held three times as much as the old carts did.  Well,
are we going for the children?  I've ordered the horses to be put
in."

"What! you want to take Kitty in the wagonette?" her mother said
reproachfully.

"Yes, at a walking pace, princess."

Levin never called the princess "maman" as men often do call
their mothers-in-law, and the princess disliked his not doing so.
But though he liked and respected the princess, Levin could not
call her so without a sense of profaning his feeling for his dead
mother.

"Come with us, maman," said Kitty.

"I don't like to see such imprudence."

"Well, I'll walk then, I'm so well." Kitty got up and went to her
husband and took his hand.

"You may be well, but everything in moderation," said the
princess.

"Well, Agafea Mihalovna, is the jam done?" said Levin, smiling to
Agafea Mihalovna, and trying to cheer her up.  "Is it all right
in the new way?"

"I suppose it's all right.  For our notions it's boiled too
long."

"It'll be all the better, Agafea Mihalovna, it won't mildew, even
though our ice has begun to thaw already, so that we've no cool
cellar to store it," said Kitty, at once divining her husband's
motive, and addressing the old housekeeper with the same feeling;
"but your pickle's so good, that mamma says she never tasted any
like it," she added, smiling, and putting her kerchief straight.

Agafea Mihalovna looked angrily at Kitty.

"You needn't try to console me, mistress.  I need only to look at
you with him, and I feel happy," she said, and something in the
rough familiarity of that _with him_ touched Kitty.

"Come along with us to look for mushrooms, you will show us the
best places." Agafea Mihalovna smiled and shook her head, as
though to say: "I should like to be angry with you too, but I
can't."

"Do it, please, by my receipt," said the princess; "put some
paper over the jam, and moisten it with a little rum, and without
even ice, it will never go mildewy."



Chapter 3



Kitty was particularly glad of a chance of being alone with her
husband, for she had noticed the shade of mortification that
had passed over his face--always so quick to reflect every
feeling--at the moment when he had come onto the terrace and
asked what they were talking of, and had got no answer.

When they had set off on foot ahead of the others, and had come
out of sight of the house onto the beaten dusty road, marked with
rusty wheels and sprinkled with grains of corn, she clung faster
to his arm and pressed it closer to her.  He had quite forgotten
the momentary unpleasant impression, and alone with her he felt,
now that the thought of her approaching motherhood was never for
a moment absent from his mind, a new and delicious bliss, quite
pure from all alloy of sense, in the being near to the woman he
loved.  There was no need of speech, yet he longed to hear the
sound of her voice, which like her eyes had changed since she had
been with child.  In her voice, as in her eyes, there was that
softness and gravity which is found in people continually
concentrated on some cherished pursuit.

"So you're not tired?  Lean more on me," said he.

"No, I'm so glad of a chance of being alone with you, and I must
own, though I'm happy with them, I do regret our winter evenings
alone."

"That was good, but this is even better.  Both are better," he
said, squeezing her hand.

"Do you know what we were talking about when you came in?"

"About jam?"

"Oh, yes, about jam too; but afterwards, about how men make
offers."

"Ah!" said Levin, listening more to the sound of her voice than
to the words she was saying, and all the while paying attention
to the road, which passed now through the forest, and avoiding
places where she might make a false step.

"And about Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka.  You've noticed?...
I'm very anxious for it," she went on.  "What do you think about
it?"  And she peeped into his face.

"I don't know what to think," Levin answered, smiling.  "Sergey
seems very strange to me in that way.  I told you, you know..."

"Yes, that he was in love with that girl who died...."

"That was when I was a child; I know about it from hearsay and
tradition.  I remember him then.  He was wonderfully sweet.  But
I've watched him since with women; he is friendly, some of them
he likes, but one feels that to him they're simply people, not
women."

"Yes, but now with Varenka...I fancy there's something..."

"Perhaps there is....  But one has to know him....  He's a
peculiar, wonderful person.  He lives a spiritual life only.
He's too pure, too exalted a nature."

"Why?  Would this lower him, then?"

"No, but he's so used to a spiritual life that he can't reconcile
himself with actual fact, and Varenka is after all fact."

Levin had grown used by now to uttering his thought boldly,
without taking the trouble of clothing it in exact language.  He
knew that his wife, in such moments of loving tenderness as now,
would understand what he meant to say from a hint, and she did
understand him.

"Yes, but there's not so much of that actual fact about her as
about me.  I can see that he would never have cared for me.  She
is altogether spiritual."

"Oh, no, he is so fond of you, and I am always so glad when my
people like you...."

"Yes, he's very nice to me; but..."

"It's not as it was with poor Nikolay...you really cared for
each other," Levin finished.  "Why not speak of him?" he added.
"I sometimes blame myself for not; it ends in one's forgetting.
Ah, how terrible and dear he was!...  Yes, what were we talking
about?" Levin said, after a pause.

"You think he can't fall in love," said Kitty, translating into
her own language.

"It's not so much that he can't fall in love," Levin said,
smiling, "but he has not the weakness necessary....  I've always
envied him, and even now, when I'm so happy, I still envy him."

"You envy him for not being able to fall in love?"

"I envy him for being better than I," said Levin.  "He does not
live for himself.  His whole life is subordinated to his duty.
And that's why he can be calm and contented."

"And you?" Kitty asked, with an ironical and loving smile.

She could never have explained the chain of thought that made her
smile; but the last link in it was that her husband, in exalting
his brother and abasing himself, was not quite sincere.  Kitty
knew that this insincerity came from his love for his brother,
from his sense of shame at being too happy, and above all from
his unflagging craving to be better--she loved it in him, and so
she smiled.

"And you?  What are you dissatisfied with?" she asked, with the
same smile.

Her disbelief in his self-dissatisfaction delighted him, and
unconsciously he tried to draw her into giving utterance to the
grounds of her disbelief.

"I am happy, but dissatisfied with myself..." he said.

"Why, how can you be dissatisfied with yourself if you are
happy?"

"Well, how shall I say?...  In my heart I really care for nothing
whatever but that you should not stumble--see?  Oh, but really
you mustn't skip about like that!" he cried, breaking off to
scold her for too agile a movement in stepping over a branch that
lay in the path.  "But when I think about myself, and compare
myself with others, especially with my brother, I feel I'm a poor
creature."

"But in what way?" Kitty pursued with the same smile.  "Don't you
too work for others?  What about your co-operative settlement,
and your work on the estate, and your book?..."

"Oh, but I feel, and particularly just now--it's your fault," he
said, pressing her hand--"that all that doesn't count.  I do it
in a way halfheartedly.  If I could care for all that as I care
for you!...  Instead of that, I do it in these days like a task
that is set me."

"Well, what would you say about papa?" asked Kitty.  "Is he a
poor creature then, as he does nothing for the public good?"

"He?--no! But then one must have the simplicity, the
straightforwardness, the goodness of your father: and I haven't
got that.  I do nothing, and I fret about it.  It's all your
doing.  Before there was you--and _this_ too," he added with a
glance towards her waist that she understood--"I put all my
energies into work; now I can't, and I'm ashamed; I do it just as
though it were a task set me, I'm pretending...."

"Well, but would you like to change this minute with Sergey
Ivanovitch?" said Kitty.  "Would you like to do this work for the
general good, and to love the task set you, as he does, and
nothing else?"

"Of course not," said Levin.  "But I'm so happy that I don't
understand anything.  So you think he'll make her an offer
today?" he added after a brief silence.

"I think so, and I don't think so.  Only, I'm awfully anxious for
it.  Here, wait a minute." She stooped down and picked a wild
camomile at the edge of the path.  "Come, count: he does propose,
he doesn't," she said, giving him the flower.

"He does, he doesn't," said Levin, tearing off the white petals.

"No, no!" Kitty, snatching at his hand, stopped him.  She had
been watching his fingers with interest.  "You picked off two."

"Oh, but see, this little one shan't count to make up," said
Levin, tearing off a little half-grown petal.  "Here's the
wagonette overtaking us."

"Aren't you tired, Kitty?" called the princess.

"Not in the least."

"If you are you can get in, as the horses are quiet and walking."

But it was not worth while to get in, they were quite near the
place, and all walked on together.


Chapter 4

Varenka, with her white kerchief on her black hair, surrounded
by the children, gaily and good-humoredly looking after them, and
at the same time visibly excited at the possibility of receiving
a declaration from the man she cared for, was very attractive.
Sergey Ivanovitch walked beside her, and never left off admiring
her.  Looking at her, he recalled all the delightful things he
had heard from her lips, all the good he knew about her, and
became more and more conscious that the feeling he had for her
was something special that he had felt long, long ago, and only
once, in his early youth.  The feeling of happiness in being near
her continually grew, and at last reached such a point that, as
he put a huge, slender-stalked agaric fungus in her basket, he
looked straight into her face, and noticing the flush of glad and
alarmed excitement that overspread her face, he was confused
himself, and smiled to her in silence a smile that said too much.

"If so," he said to himself, "I ought to think it over and make
up my mind, and not give way like a boy to the impulse of a
moment."

"I'm going to pick by myself apart from all the rest, or else my
efforts will make no show," he said, and he left the edge of the
forest where they were walking on low silky grass between old
birch trees standing far apart, and went more into the heart of
the wood, where between the white birch trunks there were gray
trunks of aspen and dark bushes of hazel.  Walking some forty
paces away, Sergey Ivanovitch, knowing he was out of sight, stood
still behind a bushy spindle-tree in full flower with its rosy
red catkins.  It was perfectly still all round him.  Only
overhead in the birches under which he stood, the flies, like a
swarm of bees, buzzed unceasingly, and from time to time the
children's voices were floated across to him.  All at once he
heard, not far from the edge of the wood, the sound of Varenka's
contralto voice, calling Grisha, and a smile of delight passed
over Sergey Ivanovitch's face.  Conscious of this smile, he shook
his head disapprovingly at his own condition, and taking out a
cigar, he began lighting it.  For a long while he could not get a
match to light against the trunk of a birch tree.  The soft
scales of the white bark rubbed off the phosphorus, and the light
went out.  At last one of the matches burned, and the fragrant
cigar smoke, hovering uncertainly in flat, wide coils, stretched
away forwards and upwards over a bush under the overhanging
branches of a birch tree.  Watching the streak of smoke, Sergey
Ivanovitch walked gently on, deliberating on his position.

"Why not?" he thought.  "If it were only a passing fancy or a
passion, if it were only this attraction--this mutual attraction
(I can call it a _mutual_ attraction), but if I felt that it was
in contradiction with the whole bent of my life--if I felt that
in giving way to this attraction I should be false to my vocation
and my duty...but it's not so.  The only thing I can say
against it is that, when I lost Marie, I said to myself that I
would remain faithful to her memory.  That's the only thing I can
say against my feeling....  That's a great thing," Sergey
Ivanovitch said to himself, feeling at the same time that this
consideration had not the slightest importance for him
personally, but would only perhaps detract from his romantic
character in the eyes of others.  "But apart from that, however
much I searched, I should never find anything to say against my
feeling.  If I were choosing by considerations of suitability
alone, I could not have found anything better."

However many women and girls he thought of whom he knew, he could
not think of a girl who united to such a degree all, positively
all, the qualities he would wish to see in his wife.  She had all
the charm and freshness of youth, but she was not a child; and if
she loved him, she loved him consciously as a woman ought to
love; that was one thing.  Another point: she was not only far
from being worldly, but had an unmistakable distaste for worldly
society, and at the same time she knew the world, and had all the
ways of a woman of the best society, which were absolutely
essential to Sergey Ivanovitch's conception of the woman who was
to share his life.  Thirdly: she was religious, and not like a
child, unconsciously religious and good, as Kitty, for example,
was, but her life was founded on religious principles.  Even in
trifling matters, Sergey Ivanovitch found in her all that he
wanted in his wife: she was poor and alone in the world, so she
would not bring with her a mass of relations and their influence
into her husband's house, as he saw now in Kitty's case.  She
would owe everything to her husband, which was what he had always
desired too for his future family life.  And this girl, who
united all these qualities, loved him.  He was a modest man, but
he could not help seeing it.  And he loved her.  There was one
consideration against it--his age.  But he came of a long-lived
family, he had not a single gray hair, no one would have taken
him for forty, and he remembered Varenka's saying that it was
only in Russia that men of fifty thought themselves old, and that
in France a man of fifty considers himself _dans la force de
l'âge_, while a man of forty is _un jeune homme_.  But what did
the mere reckoning of years matter when he felt as young in heart
as he had been twenty years ago?  Was it not youth to feel as he
felt now, when coming from the other side to the edge of the wood
he saw in the glowing light of the slanting sunbeams the gracious
figure of Varenka in her yellow gown with her basket, walking
lightly by the trunk of an old birch tree, and when this
impression of the sight of Varenka blended so harmoniously with
the beauty of the view, of the yellow oatfield lying bathed in
the slanting sunshine, and beyond it the distant ancient forest
flecked with yellow and melting into the blue of the distance?
His heart throbbed joyously.  A softened feeling came over him.
He felt that he had made up his mind.  Varenka, who had just
crouched down to pick a mushroom, rose with a supple movement and
looked round.  Flinging away the cigar, Sergey Ivanovitch
advanced with resolute steps towards her.


Chapter 5


"Varvara Andreevna, when I was very young, I set before myself
the ideal of the woman I loved and should be happy to call my
wife.  I have lived through a long life, and now for the first
time I have met what I sought--in you.  I love you, and offer you
my hand."

Sergey Ivanovitch was saying this to himself while he was ten
paces from Varvara.  Kneeling down, with her hands over the
mushrooms to guard them from Grisha, she was calling little
Masha.

"Come here, little ones!  There are so many!" she was saying in
her sweet, deep voice.

Seeing Sergey Ivanovitch approaching, she did not get up and did
not change her position, but everything told him that she felt
his presence and was glad of it.

"Well, did you find some?" she asked from under the white
kerchief, turning her handsome, gently smiling face to him.

"Not one," said Sergey Ivanovitch.  "Did you?"

She did not answer, busy with the children who thronged about
her.

"That one too, near the twig," she pointed out to little Masha a
little fungus, split in half across its rosy cap by the dry grass
from under which it thrust itself.  Varenka got up while Masha
picked the fungus, breaking it into two white halves.  "This
brings back my childhood," she added, moving apart from the
children beside Sergey Ivanovitch.

They walked on for some steps in silence.  Varenka saw that he
wanted to speak; she guessed of what, and felt faint with joy and
panic.  They had walked so far away that no one could hear them
now, but still he did not begin to speak.  It would have been
better for Varenka to be silent.  After a silence it would have
been easier for them to say what they wanted to say than after
talking about mushrooms.  But against her own will, as it were
accidentally, Varenka said:

"So you found nothing?  In the middle of the wood there are
always fewer, though."  Sergey Ivanovitch sighed and made no
answer.  He was annoyed that she had spoken about the mushrooms.
He wanted to bring her back to the first words she had uttered
about her childhood; but after a pause of some length, as though
against his own will, he made an observation in response to her
last words.

"I have heard that the white edible funguses are found
principally at the edge of the wood, though I can't tell them
apart."

Some minutes more passed, they moved still further away from the
children, and were quite alone.  Varenka's heart throbbed so that
she heard it beating, and felt that she was turning red and pale
and red again.

To be the wife of a man like Koznishev, after her position with
Madame Stahl, was to her imagination the height of happiness.
Besides, she was almost certain that she was in love with him.
And this moment it would have to be decided.  She felt
frightened.  She dreaded both his speaking and his not speaking.

Now or never it must be said--that Sergey Ivanovitch felt too.
Everything in the expression, the flushed cheeks and the downcast
eyes of Varenka betrayed a painful suspense.  Sergey Ivanovitch
saw it and felt sorry for her.  He felt even that to say nothing
now would be a slight to her.  Rapidly in his own mind he ran
over all the arguments in support of his decision.  He even said
over to himself the words in which he meant to put his offer, but
instead of those words, some utterly unexpected reflection that
occurred to him made him ask:

"What is the difference between the 'birch' mushroom and the
'white' mushroom?"

Varenka's lips quivered with emotion as she answered:

"In the top part there is scarcely any difference, it's in the
stalk."

And as soon as these words were uttered, both he and she felt
that it was over, that what was to have been said would not be
said; and their emotion, which had up to then been continually
growing more intense, began to subside.

"The birch mushroom's stalk suggests a dark man's chin after two
days without shaving," said Sergey Ivanovitch, speaking quite
calmly now.

"Yes, that's true," answered Varenka smiling, and unconsciously
the direction of their walk changed.  They began to turn towards
the children.  Varenka felt both sore and ashamed; at the same
time she had a sense of relief.

When he had got home again and went over the whole subject,
Sergey Ivanovitch thought his previous decision had been a
mistaken one.  He could not be false to the memory of Marie.

"Gently, children, gently!" Levin shouted quite angrily to the
children, standing before his wife to protect her when the crowd
of children flew with shrieks of delight to meet them.

Behind the children Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka walked out of
the wood.  Kitty had no need to ask Varenka; she saw from the
calm and somewhat crestfallen faces of both that her plans had
not come off.

"Well?" her husband questioned her as they were going home again.

"It doesn't bite," said Kitty, her smile and manner of speaking
recalling her father, a likeness Levin often noticed with
pleasure.

"How doesn't bite?"

"I'll show you," she said, taking her husband's hand, lifting it
to her mouth, and just faintly brushing it with closed lips.
"Like a kiss on a priest's hand."

"Which didn't it bite with?" he said, laughing.

"Both.  But it should have been like this..."

"There are some peasants coming..."

"Oh, they didn't see."


Chapter 6


During the time of the children's tea the grown-up people sat in
the balcony and talked as though nothing had happened, though
they all, especially Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka, were very
well aware that there had happened an event which, though
negative, was of very great importance.  They both had the same
feeling, rather like that of a schoolboy after an examination,
which has left him in the same class or shut him out of the
school forever.  Everyone present, feeling too that something
had happened, talked eagerly about extraneous subjects.  Levin
and Kitty were particularly happy and conscious of their love
that evening.  And their happiness in their love seemed to imply
a disagreeable slur on those who would have liked to feel the
same and could not--and they felt a prick of conscience.

"Mark my words, Alexander will not come," said the old princess.

That evening they were expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch to come down
by train, and the old prince had written that possibly he might
come too.

"And I know why," the princess went on; "he says that young
people ought to be left alone for a while at first."

"But papa has left us alone.  We've never seen him," said Kitty.
"Besides, we're not young people!--we're old, married people by
now."

"Only if he doesn't come, I shall say good-bye to you children,"
said the princess, sighing mournfully.

"What nonsense, mamma!" both the daughters fell upon her at once.

"How do you suppose he is feeling? Why, now..."

And suddenly there was an unexpected quiver in the princess's
voice.  Her daughters were silent, and looked at one another.
"Maman always finds something to be miserable about," they said
in that glance.  They did not know that happy as the princess was
in her daughter's house, and useful as she felt herself to be
there, she had been extremely miserable, both on her own account
and her husband's, ever since they had married their last and
favorite daughter, and the old home had been left empty.

"What is it, Agafea Mihalovna?" Kitty asked suddenly of Agafea
Mihalovna, who was standing with a mysterious air, and a face
full of meaning.

"About supper."

"Well, that's right," said Dolly; "you go and arrange about it,
and I'll go and hear Grisha repeat his lesson, or else he will
have nothing done all day."

"That's my lesson!  No, Dolly, I'm going," said Levin, jumping
up.

Grisha, who was by now at a high school, had to go over the
lessons of the term in the summer holidays.  Darya Alexandrovna,
who had been studying Latin with her son in Moscow before, had
made it a rule on coming to the Levins' to go over with him, at
least once a day, the most difficult lessons of Latin and
arithmetic.  Levin had offered to take her place, but the mother,
having once overheard Levin's lesson, and noticing that it was
not given exactly as the teacher in Moscow had given it, said
resolutely, though with much embarrassment and anxiety not to
mortify Levin, that they must keep strictly to the book as the
teacher had done, and that she had better undertake it again
herself.  Levin was amazed both at Stepan Arkadyevitch, who, by
neglecting his duty, threw upon the mother the supervision of
studies of which she had no comprehension, and at the teachers
for teaching the children so badly.  But he promised his
sister-in-law to give the lessons exactly as she wished.  And he
went on teaching Grisha, not in his own way, but by the book, and
so took little interest in it, and often forgot the hour of the
lesson.  So it had been today.

"No, I'm going, Dolly, you sit still," he said.  "We'll do it all
properly, like the book.  Only when Stiva comes, and we go out
shooting, then we shall have to miss it."

And Levin went to Grisha.

Varenka was saying the same thing to Kitty.  Even in the happy,
well-ordered household of the Levins Varenka had succeeded in
making herself useful.

"I'll see to the supper, you sit still," she said, and got up to
go to Agafea Mihalovna.

"Yes, yes, most likely they've not been able to get chickens.  If
so, ours..."

"Agafea Mihalovna and I will see about it," and Varenka vanished
with her.

"What a nice girl!" said the princess.

"Not nice, maman; she's an exquisite girl; there's no one else
like her."

"So you are expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch today?" said Sergey
Ivanovitch, evidently not disposed to pursue the conversation
about Varenka.  "It would be difficult to find two sons-in-law
more unlike than yours," he said with a subtle smile.  "One all
movement, only living in society, like a fish in water; the other
our Kostya, lively, alert, quick in everything, but as soon as he
is in society, he either sinks into apathy, or struggles
helplessly like a fish on land."

"Yes, he's very heedless," said the princess, addressing Sergey
Ivanovitch.  "I've been meaning, indeed, to ask you to tell him
that it's out of the question for her" (she indicated Kitty) "to
stay here; that she positively must come to Moscow.  He talks of
getting a doctor down..."

"Maman, he'll do everything; he has agreed to everything," Kitty
said, angry with her mother for appealing to Sergey Ivanovitch to
judge in such a matter.

In the middle of their conversation they heard the snorting of
horses and the sound of wheels on the gravel.  Dolly had not time
to get up to go and meet her husband, when from the window of the
room below, where Grisha was having his lesson, Levin leaped out
and helped Grisha out after him.

"It's Stiva!" Levin shouted from under the balcony.  "We've
finished, Dolly, don't be afraid!" he added, and started running
like a boy to meet the carriage.

"_Is ea id, ejus, ejus, ejus!_" shouted Grisha, skipping along
the avenue.

"And some one else too!  Papa, of course!" cried Levin, stopping
at the entrance of the avenue.  "Kitty, don't come down the steep
staircase, go round."

But Levin had been mistaken in taking the person sitting in the
carriage for the old prince.  As he got nearer to the carriage he
saw beside Stepan Arkadyevitch not the prince but a handsome,
stout young man in a Scotch cap, with long ends of ribbon behind.
This was Vassenka Veslovsky, a distant cousin of the
Shtcherbatskys, a brilliant young gentleman in Petersburg and
Moscow society.  "A capital fellow, and a keen sportsman," as
Stepan Arkadyevitch said, introducing him.

Not a whit abashed by the disappointment caused by his having
come in place of the old prince, Veslovsky greeted Levin gaily,
claiming acquaintance with him in the past, and snatching up
Grisha into the carriage, lifted him over the pointer that Stepan
Arkadyevitch had brought with him.

Levin did not get into the carriage, but walked behind.  He was
rather vexed at the non-arrival of the old prince, whom he liked
more and more the more he saw of him, and also at the arrival of
this Vassenka Veslovsky, a quite uncongenial and superfluous
person.  He seemed to him still more uncongenial and superfluous
when, on approaching the steps where the whole party, children
and grown-up, were gathered together in much excitement, Levin
saw Vassenka Veslovsky, with a particularly warm and gallant air,
kissing Kitty's hand.

"Your wife and I are cousins and very old friends," said
Vassenka Veslovsky, once more shaking Levin's hand with great
warmth.

"Well, are there plenty of birds?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
Levin, hardly leaving time for everyone to utter their greetings.
"We've come with the most savage intentions.  Why, maman, they've
not been in Moscow since!  Look, Tanya, here's something for you!
Get it, please, it's in the carriage, behind!" he talked in all
directions.  "How pretty you've grown, Dolly," he said to his
wife, once more kissing her hand, holding it in one of his, and
patting it with the other.

Levin, who a minute before had been in the happiest frame of
mind, now looked darkly at everyone, and everything displeased
him.

"Who was it he kissed yesterday with those lips?" he thought,
looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch's tender demonstrations to his
wife.  He looked at Dolly, and he did not like her either.

"She doesn't believe in his love.  So what is she so pleased
about?  Revolting!" thought Levin.

He looked at the princess, who had been so dear to him a minute
before, and he did not like the manner in which she welcomed this
Vassenka, with his ribbons, just as though she were in her own
house.

Even Sergey Ivanovitch, who had come out too onto the steps,
seemed to him unpleasant with the show of cordiality with which
he met Stepan Arkadyevitch, though Levin knew that his brother
neither liked nor respected Oblonsky.

And Varenka, even she seemed hateful, with her air _sainte
nitouche_ making the acquaintance of this gentleman, while all
the while she was thinking of nothing but getting married.

And more hateful than anyone was Kitty for falling in with the
tone of gaiety with which this gentleman regarded his visit in
the country, as though it were a holiday for himself and everyone
else.  And, above all, unpleasant was that particular smile with
which she responded to his smile.

Noisily talking, they all went into the house; but as soon as
they were all seated, Levin turned and went out.

Kitty saw something was wrong with her husband.  She tried to
seize a moment to speak to him alone, but he made haste to get
away from her, saying he was wanted at the counting-house.  It
was long since his own work on the estate had seemed to him so
important as at that moment.  "It's all holiday for them," he
thought; "but these are no holiday matters, they won't wait, and
there's no living without them."


Chapter 7


Levin came back to the house only when they sent to summon him to
supper.  On the stairs were standing Kitty and Agafea Mihalovna,
consulting about wines for supper.

"But why are you making all this fuss?  Have what we usually do."

"No, Stiva doesn't drink...Kostya, stop, what's the matter?"
Kitty began, hurrying after him, but he strode ruthlessly away to
the dining room without waiting for her, and at once joined in
the lively general conversation which was being maintained there
by Vassenka Veslovsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Well, what do you say, are we going shooting tomorrow?" said
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Please, do let's go," said Veslovsky, moving to another chair,
where he sat down sideways, with one fat leg crossed under him.

"I shall be delighted, we will go.  And have you had any shooting
yet this year?" said Levin to Veslovsky, looking intently at his
leg, but speaking with that forced amiability that Kitty knew so
well in him, and that was so out of keeping with him.  "I can't
answer for our finding grouse, but there are plenty of snipe.
Only we ought to start early.  You're not tired?  Aren't you
tired, Stiva?"

"Me tired?  I've never been tired yet.  Suppose we stay up all
night.  Let's go for a walk!"

"Yes, really, let's not go to bed at all!  Capital!" Veslovsky
chimed in.

"Oh, we all know you can do without sleep, and keep other people
up too," Dolly said to her husband, with that faint note of irony
in her voice which she almost always had now with her husband.
"But to my thinking, it's time for bed now....  I'm going, I
don't want supper."

"No, do stay a little, Dolly," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going
round to her side behind the table where they were having supper.
"I've so much still to tell you."

"Nothing really, I suppose."

"Do you know Veslovsky has been at Anna's, and he's going to them
again?  You know they're hardly fifty miles from you, and I too
must certainly go over there.  Veslovsky, come here!"

Vassenka crossed over to the ladies, and sat down beside Kitty.

"Ah, do tell me, please; you have stayed with her?  How was she?"
Darya Alexandrovna appealed to him.

Levin was left at the other end of the table, and though never
pausing in his conversation with the princess and Varenka, he saw
that there was an eager and mysterious conversation going on
between Stepan Arkadyevitch, Dolly, Kitty, and Veslovsky.  And
that was not all.  He saw on his wife's face an expression of
real feeling as she gazed with fixed eyes on the handsome face of
Vassenka, who was telling them something with great animation.

"It's exceedingly nice at their place," Veslovsky was telling
them about Vronsky and Anna.  "I can't, of course, take it upon
myself to judge, but in their house you feel the real feeling of
home."

"What do they intend doing?"

"I believe they think of going to Moscow."

"How jolly it would be for us all to go over to them together!
When are you going there?" Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Vassenka.

"I'm spending July there."

"Will you go?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his wife.

"I've been wanting to a long while; I shall certainly go," said
Dolly.  "I am sorry for her, and I know her.  She's a splendid
woman.  I will go alone, when you go back, and then I shall be in
no one's way.  And it will be better indeed without you."

"To be sure," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "And you, Kitty?"

"I?  Why should I go?" Kitty said, flushing all over, and she
glanced round at her husband.

"Do you know Anna Arkadyevna, then?" Veslovsky asked her.  "She's
a very fascinating woman."

"Yes," she answered Veslovsky, crimsoning still more.  She got up
and walked across to her husband.

"Are you going shooting, then, tomorrow?" she said.

His jealousy had in these few moments, especially at the flush
that had overspread her cheeks while she was talking to
Veslovsky, gone far indeed.  Now as he heard her words, he
construed them in his own fashion.  Strange as it was to him
afterwards to recall it, it seemed to him at the moment clear
that in asking whether he was going shooting, all she cared to
know was whether he would give that pleasure to Vassenka
Veslovsky, with whom, as he fancied, she was in love.

"Yes, I'm going," he answered her in an unnatural voice,
disagreeable to himself.

"No, better spend the day here tomorrow, or Dolly won't see
anything of her husband, and set off the day after," said Kitty.

The motive of Kitty's words was interpreted by Levin thus: "Don't
separate me from _him_.  I don't care about _your_ going, but do
let me enjoy the society of this delightful young man."

"Oh, if you wish, we'll stay here tomorrow," Levin answered,
with peculiar amiability.

Vassenka meanwhile, utterly unsuspecting the misery his presence
had occasioned, got up from the table after Kitty, and watching
her with smiling and admiring eyes, he followed her.

Levin saw that look.  He turned white, and for a minute he could
hardly breathe.  "How dare he look at my wife like that!" was the
feeling that boiled within him.

"Tomorrow, then?  Do, please, let us go," said Vassenka, sitting
down on a chair, and again crossing his leg as his habit was.

Levin's jealousy went further still.  Already he saw himself a
deceived husband, looked upon by his wife and her lover as simply
necessary to provide them with the conveniences and pleasures of
life....  But in spite of that he made polite and hospitable
inquiries of Vassenka about his shooting, his gun, and his boots,
and agreed to go shooting next day.

Happily for Levin, the old princess cut short his agonies by
getting up herself and advising Kitty to go to bed.  But even at
this point Levin could not escape another agony.  As he said
good-night to his hostess, Vassenka would again have kissed her
hand, but Kitty, reddening, drew back her hand and said with a
naïve bluntness, for which the old princess scolded her
afterwards:

"We don't like that fashion."

In Levin's eyes she was to blame for having allowed such
relations to arise, and still more to blame for showing so
awkwardly that she did not like them.

"Why, how can one want to go to bed!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
who, after drinking several glasses of wine at supper, was now in
his most charming and sentimental humor.  "Look, Kitty," he said,
pointing to the moon, which had just risen behind the lime trees
--"how exquisite!  Veslovsky, this is the time for a serenade.
You know, he has a splendid voice; we practiced songs together
along the road.  He has brought some lovely songs with him, two
new ones.  Varvara Andreevna and he must sing some duets."

When the party had broken up, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked a long
while about the avenue with Veslovsky; their voices could be
heard singing one of the new songs.

Levin hearing these voices sat scowling in an easy-chair in his
wife's bedroom, and maintained an obstinate silence when she
asked him what was wrong.  But when at last with a timid glance
she hazarded the question: "Was there perhaps something you
disliked about Veslovsky?"--it all burst out, and he told her
all.  He was humiliated himself at what he was saying, and that
exasperated him all the more.

He stood facing her with his eyes glittering menacingly under his
scowling brows, and he squeezed his strong arms across his chest,
as though he were straining every nerve to hold himself in.  The
expression of his face would have been grim, and even cruel, if
it had not at the same time had a look of suffering which touched
her.  His jaws were twitching, and his voice kept breaking.

"You must understand that I'm not jealous, that's a nasty word.
I can't be jealous, and believe that....  I can't say what I
feel, but this is awful....  I'm not jealous, but I'm wounded,
humiliated that anybody  dare think, that anybody dare look at
you with eyes like that."

"Eyes like what?" said Kitty, trying as conscientiously as
possible to recall every word and gesture of that evening and
every shade implied in them.

At the very bottom of her heart she did think there had been
something precisely at the moment when he had crossed over after
her to the other end of the table; but she dared not own it even
to herself, and would have been even more unable to bring herself
to say so to him, and so increase his suffering.

"And what can there possibly be attractive about me as I am
now?..."

"Ah!" he cried, clutching at his head, "you shouldn't say
that!...  If you had been attractive then..."

"Oh, no, Kostya, oh, wait a minute, oh, do listen!" she said,
looking at him with an expression of pained commiseration.  "Why,
what can you be thinking about!  When for me there's no one in
the world, no one, no one!...  Would you like me never to see
anyone?"

For the first minute she had been offended at his jealousy; she
was angry that the slightest amusement, even the most innocent,
should be forbidden her; but now she would readily have
sacrificed, not merely such trifles, but everything, for his
peace of mind, to save him from the agony he was suffering.

"You must understand the horror and comedy of my position," he
went on in a desperate whisper; "that he's in my house, that he's
done nothing improper positively except his free and easy airs
and the way he sits on his legs.  He thinks it's the best
possible form, and so I'm obliged to be civil to him."

"But, Kostya, you're exaggerating," said Kitty, at the bottom of
her heart rejoicing at the depth of his love for her, shown now
in his jealousy.

"The most awful part of it all is that you're just as you always
are, and especially now when to me you're something sacred, and
we're so happy, so particularly happy--and all of a sudden a
little wretch....  He's not a little wretch; why should I abuse
him?  I have nothing to do with him.  But why should my, and
your, happiness..."

"Do you know, I understand now what it's all come from," Kitty
was beginning.

"Well, what? what?"

"I saw how you looked while we were talking at supper."

"Well, well!" Levin said in dismay.

She told him what they had been talking about.  And as she told
him, she was breathless with emotion.  Levin was silent for a
space, then he scanned her pale and distressed face, and suddenly
he clutched at his head.

"Katya, I've been worrying you!  Darling, forgive me!  It's
madness!  Katya, I'm a criminal.  And how could you be so
distressed at such idiocy?"

"Oh, I was sorry for you."

"For me? for me?  How mad I am!...  But why make you miserable?
It's awful to think that any outsider can shatter our happiness."

"It's humiliating too, of course."

"Oh, then I'll keep him here all the summer, and will overwhelm
him with civility," said Levin, kissing her hands.  "You shall
see.  Tomorrow....  Oh, yes, we are going tomorrow."


Chapter 8


Next day, before the ladies were up, the wagonette and a trap for
the shooting party were at the door, and Laska, aware since early
morning that they were going shooting, after much whining and
darting to and fro, had sat herself down in the wagonette beside
the coachman, and, disapproving of the delay, was excitedly
watching the door from which the sportsmen still did not come
out.  The first to come out was Vassenka Veslovsky, in new high
boots that reached half-way up his thick thighs, in a green
blouse, with a new Russian leather cartridge-belt, and in his
Scotch cap with ribbons, with a brand-new English gun without a
sling.  Laska flew up to him, welcomed him, and jumping up, asked
him in her own way whether the others were coming soon, but
getting no answer from him, she returned to her post of
observation and sank into repose again, her head on one side, and
one ear pricked up to listen.  At last the door opened with a
creak, and Stepan Arkadyevitch's spot-and-tan pointer Krak flew
out, running round and round and turning over in the air.  Stepan
Arkadyevitch himself followed with a gun in his hand and a cigar
in his mouth.

"Good dog, good dog, Krak!" he cried encouragingly to the dog,
who put his paws up on his chest, catching at his game bag.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was dressed in rough leggings and spats, in
torn trousers and a short coat.  On his head there was a wreck of
a hat of indefinite form, but his gun of a new patent was a
perfect gem, and his game bag and cartridge belt, though worn,
were of the very best quality.

Vassenka Veslovsky had had no notion before that it was truly
_chic_ for a sportsman to be in tatters, but to have his shooting
outfit of the best quality.  He saw it now as he looked at Stepan
Arkadyevitch, radiant in his rags, graceful, well-fed, and
joyous, a typical Russian nobleman.  And he made up his mind that
next time he went shooting he would certainly adopt the same
get-up.

"Well, and what about our host?" he asked.

"A young wife," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.

"Yes, and such a charming one!"

"He came down dressed.  No doubt he's run up to her again."

Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed right.  Levin had run up again to his
wife to ask her once more if she forgave him for his idiocy
yesterday, and, moreover, to beg her for Christ's sake to be more
careful.  The great thing was for her to keep away from the
children--they might any minute push against her.  Then he had
once more to hear her declare that she was not angry with him for
going away for two days, and to beg her to be sure to send him a
note next morning by a servant on horseback, to write him, if it
were but two words only, to let him know that all was well with
her.

Kitty was distressed, as she always was, at parting for a couple
of days from her husband, but when she saw his eager figure,
looking big and strong in his shooting-boots and his white
blouse, and a sort of sportsman elation and excitement
incomprehensible to her, she forgot her own chagrin for the sake
of his pleasure, and said good-bye to him cheerfully.

"Pardon, gentlemen!" he said, running out onto the steps.  "Have
you put the lunch in?  Why is the chestnut on the right?  Well,
it doesn't matter.  Laska, down; go and lie down!"

"Put it with the herd of oxen," he said to the herdsman, who was
waiting for him at the steps with some question.  "Excuse me,
here comes another villain."

Levin jumped out of the wagonette, in which he had already taken
his seat, to meet the carpenter, who came towards the steps with
a rule in his hand.

"You didn't come to the counting house yesterday, and now you're
detaining me.  Well, what is it?"

"Would your honor let me make another turning?  It's only three
steps to add.  And we make it just fit at the same time.  It will
be much more convenient."

"You should have listened to me," Levin answered with annoyance.
"I said: Put the lines and then fit in the steps.  Now there's
no setting it right.  Do as I told you, and make a new
staircase."

The point was that in the lodge that was being built the
carpenter had spoiled the staircase, fitting it together without
calculating the space it was to fill, so that the steps were all
sloping when it was put in place.  Now the carpenter wanted,
keeping the same staircase, to add three steps.

"It will be much better."

"But where's your staircase coming out with its three steps?"

"Why, upon my word, sir," the carpenter said with a contemptuous
smile.  "It comes out right at the very spot.  It starts, so to
speak," he said, with a persuasive gesture; "it comes down, and
comes down, and comes out."

"But three steps will add to the length too...where is it to
come out?"

"Why, to be sure, it'll start from the bottom and go up and go
up, and come out so," the carpenter said obstinately and
convincingly.

"It'll reach the ceiling and the wall."

"Upon my word!  Why, it'll go up, and up, and come out like
this."

Levin took out a ramrod and began sketching him the staircase in
the dust.

"There, do you see?"

"As your honor likes," said the carpenter, with a sudden gleam in
his eyes, obviously understanding the thing at last.  "It seems
it'll be best to make a new one."

"Well, then, do it as you're told," Levin shouted, seating
himself in the wagonette.  "Down!  Hold the dogs, Philip!"

Levin felt now at leaving behind all his family and household
cares such an eager sense of joy in life and expectation that he
was not disposed to talk.  Besides that, he had that feeling of
concentrated excitement that every sportsman experiences as he
approaches the scene of action.  If he had anything on his mind
at that moment, it was only the doubt whether they would start
anything in the Kolpensky marsh, whether Laska would show to
advantage in comparison with Krak, and whether he would shoot
well that day himself.  Not to disgrace himself before a new
spectator--not to be outdone by Oblonsky--that too was a thought
that crossed his brain.

Oblonsky was feeling the same, and he too was not talkative.
Vassenka Veslovsky kept up alone a ceaseless flow of cheerful
chatter.  As he listened to him now, Levin felt ashamed to think
how unfair he had been to him the day before.  Vassenka was
really a nice fellow, simple, good-hearted, and very
good-humored.  If Levin had met him before he was married, he
would have made friends with him.  Levin rather disliked his
holiday attitude to life and a sort of free and easy assumption
of elegance.  It was as though he assumed a high degree of
importance in himself that could not be disputed, because he had
long nails and a stylish cap, and everything else to correspond;
but this could be forgiven for the sake of his good nature and
good breeding.  Levin liked him for his good education, for
speaking French and English with such an excellent accent, and
for being a man of his world.

Vassenka was extremely delighted with the left horse, a horse of
the Don Steppes.  He kept praising him enthusiastically.  "How
fine it must be galloping over the steppes on a steppe horse!
Eh? isn't it?" he said.  He had imagined riding on a steppe horse
as something wild and romantic, and it turned out nothing of the
sort.  But his simplicity, particularly in conjunction with his
good looks, his amiable smile, and the grace of his movements,
was very attractive.  Either because his nature was sympathetic
to Levin, or because Levin was trying to atone for his sins of
the previous evening by seeing nothing but what was good in him,
anyway he liked his society.

After they had driven over two miles from home, Veslovsky all at
once felt for a cigar and his pocketbook, and did not know
whether he had lost them or left them on the table.  In the
pocketbook there were thirty-seven pounds, and so the matter
could not be left in uncertainty.

"Do you know what, Levin, I'll gallop home on that left
trace-horse.  That will be splendid.  Eh?" he said, preparing to
get out.

"No, why should you?" answered Levin, calculating that Vassenka
could hardly weigh less than seventeen stone.  "I'll send the
coachman."

The coachman rode back on the trace-horse, and Levin himself
drove the remaining pair.


Chapter 9


"Well, now what's our plan of campaign?  Tell us all about it,"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Our plan is this.  Now we're driving to Gvozdyov.  In Gvozdyov
there's a grouse marsh on this side, and beyond Gvozdyov come
some magnificent snipe marshes where there are grouse too.  It's
hot now, and we'll get there--it's fifteen miles or so--towards
evening and have some evening shooting; we'll spend the night
there and go on tomorrow to the bigger moors."

"And is there nothing on the way?"

"Yes; but we'll reserve ourselves; besides it's hot.  There are
two nice little places, but I doubt there being anything to
shoot."

Levin would himself have liked to go into these little places,
but they were near home; he could shoot them over any time, and
they were only little places--there would hardly be room for
three to shoot.  And so, with some insincerity, he said that he
doubted there being anything to shoot.  When they reached a
little marsh Levin would have driven by, but Stepan Arkadyevitch,
with the experienced eye of a sportsman, at once detected reeds
visible from the road.

"Shan't we try that?" he said, pointing to the little marsh.

"Levin, do, please! how delightful!" Vassenka Veslovsky began
begging, and Levin could but consent.

Before they had time to stop, the dogs had flown one before the
other into the marsh.

"Krak! Laska!..."

The dogs came back.

"There won't be room for three.  I'll stay here," said Levin,
hoping they would find nothing but peewits, who had been startled
by the dogs, and turning over in their flight, were plaintively
wailing over the marsh.

"No!  Come along, Levin, let's go together!" Veslovsky called.

"Really, there's not room.  Laska, back, Laska!  You won't want
another dog, will you?"

Levin remained with the wagonette, and looked enviously at the
sportsmen.  They walked right across the marsh.  Except little
birds and peewits, of which Vassenka killed one, there was
nothing in the marsh.

"Come, you see now that it was not that I grudged the marsh,"
said Levin, "only it's wasting time."

"Oh, no, it was jolly all the same.  Did you see us?" said
Vassenka Veslovsky, clambering awkwardly into the wagonette with
his gun and his peewit in his hands.  "How splendidly I shot
this bird!  Didn't I?  Well, shall we soon be getting to the real
place?"

The horses started off suddenly, Levin knocked his head against
the stock of someone's gun, and there was the report of a shot.
The gun did actually go off first, but that was how it seemed to
Levin.  It appeared that Vassenka Veslovsky had pulled only one
trigger, and had left the other hammer still cocked.  The charge
flew into the ground without doing harm to anyone.  Stepan
Arkadyevitch shook his head and laughed reprovingly at Veslovsky.
But Levin had not the heart to reprove him.  In the first place,
any reproach would have seemed to be called forth by the danger
he had incurred and the bump that had come up on Levin's
forehead.  And besides, Veslovsky was at first so naïvely
distressed, and then laughed so good-humoredly and infectiously
at their general dismay, that one could not but laugh with him.

When they reached the second marsh, which was fairly large, and
would inevitably take some time to shoot over, Levin tried to
persuade them to pass it by.  But Veslovsky again overpersuaded
him.  Again, as the marsh was narrow, Levin, like a good host,
remained with the carriage.

Krak made straight for some clumps of sedge.  Vassenka Veslovsky
was the first to run after the dog.  Before Stepan Arkadyevitch
had time to come up, a grouse flew out.  Veslovsky missed it and
it flew into an unmown meadow.  This grouse was left for
Veslovsky to follow up.  Krak found it again and pointed, and
Veslovsky shot it and went back to the carriage.  "Now you go and
I'll stay with the horses," he said.

Levin had begun to feel the pangs of a sportsman's envy.  He
handed the reins to Veslovsky and walked into the marsh.

Laska, who had been plaintively whining and fretting against the
injustice of her treatment, flew straight ahead to a hopeful
place that Levin knew well, and that Krak had not yet come upon.

"Why don't you stop her?" shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"She won't scare them," answered Levin, sympathizing with his
bitch's pleasure and hurrying after her.

As she came nearer and nearer to the familiar breeding places
there was more and more earnestness in Laska's exploration.  A
little marsh bird did not divert her attention for more than an
instant.  She made one circuit round the clump of reeds, was
beginning a second, and suddenly quivered with excitement and
became motionless.

"Come, come, Stiva!" shouted Levin, feeling his heart beginning
to beat more violently; and all of a sudden, as though some sort
of shutter had been drawn back from his straining ears, all
sounds, confused but loud, began to beat on his hearing, losing
all sense of distance.  He heard the steps of Stepan
Arkadyevitch, mistaking them for the tramp of the horses in the
distance; he heard the brittle sound of the twigs on which he had
trodden, taking this sound for the flying of a grouse.  He heard
too, not far behind him, a splashing in the water, which he could
not explain to himself.

Picking his steps, he moved up to the dog.

"Fetch it!"

Not a grouse but a snipe flew up from beside the dog.  Levin had
lifted his gun, but at the very instant when he was taking aim,
the sound of splashing grew louder, came closer, and was joined
with the sound of Veslovsky's voice, shouting something with
strange loudness.  Levin saw he had his gun pointed behind the
snipe, but still he fired.

When he had made sure he had missed, Levin looked round and saw
the horses and the wagonette not on the road but in the marsh.

Veslovsky, eager to see the shooting, had driven into the marsh,
and got the horses stuck in the mud.

"Damn the fellow!" Levin said to himself, as he went back to the
carriage that had sunk in the mire.  "What did you drive in for?"
he said to him dryly, and calling the coachman, he began pulling
the horses out.

Levin was vexed both at being hindered from shooting and at his
horses getting stuck in the mud, and still more at the fact that
neither Stepan Arkadyevitch nor Veslovsky helped him and the
coachman to unharness the horses and get them out, since neither
of them had the slightest notion of harnessing.  Without
vouchsafing a syllable in reply to Vassenka's protestations that
it had been quite dry there, Levin worked in silence with the
coachman at extricating the horses.  But then, as he got warm at
the work and saw how assiduously Veslovsky was tugging at the
wagonette by one of the mud-guards, so that he broke it indeed,
Levin blamed himself for having under the influence of
yesterday's feelings been too cold to Veslovsky, and tried to be
particularly genial so as to smooth over his chilliness.  When
everything had been put right, and the carriage had been brought
back to the road, Levin had the lunch served.

"_Bon appétit--bonne conscience!  Ce poulet va tomber jusqu'au
fond de mes bottes_," Vassenka, who had recovered his spirits,
quoted the French saying as he finished his second chicken.
"Well, now our troubles are over, now everything's going to go
well.  Only, to atone for my sins, I'm bound to sit on the box.
That's so? eh?  No, no!  I'll be your Automedon.  You shall see
how I'll get you along," he answered, not letting go the rein,
when Levin begged him to let the coachman drive.  "No, I must
atone for my sins, and I'm very comfortable on the box."  And he
drove.

Levin was a little afraid he would exhaust the horses, especially
the chestnut, whom he did not know how to hold in; but
unconsciously he fell under the influence of his gaiety and
listened to the songs he sang all the way on the box, or the
descriptions and representations he gave of driving in the
English fashion, four-in-hand; and it was in the very best of
spirits that after lunch they drove to the Gvozdyov marsh.


Chapter 10


Vassenka drove the horses so smartly that they reached the marsh
too early, while it was still hot.

As they drew near this more important marsh, the chief aim of
their expedition, Levin could not help considering how he could
get rid of Vassenka and be free in his movements.  Stepan
Arkadyevitch evidently had the same desire, and on his face Levin
saw the look of anxiety always present in a true sportsman when
beginning shooting, together with a certain good-humored slyness
peculiar to him.

"How shall we go?  It's a splendid marsh, I see, and there are
hawks," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing to two great birds
hovering over the reeds.  "Where there are hawks, there is sure
to be game."

"Now, gentlemen," said Levin, pulling up his boots and examining
the lock of his gun with rather a gloomy expression, "do you see
those reeds?"  He pointed to an oasis of blackish green in the
huge half-mown wet meadow that stretched along the right bank of
the river.  "The marsh begins here, straight in front of us, do
you see--where it is greener?  From here it runs to the right
where the horses are; there are breeding places there, and
grouse, and all round those reeds as far as that alder, and right
up to the mill.  Over there, do you see, where the pools are?
That's the best place.  There I once shot seventeen snipe.
We'll separate with the dogs and go in different directions, and
then meet over there at the mill."

"Well, which shall go to left and which to right?" asked Stepan
Arkadyevitch.  "It's wider to the right; you two go that way and
I'll take the left," he said with apparent carelessness.

"Capital! we'll make the bigger bag!  Yes, come along, come
along!" Vassenka exclaimed.

Levin could do nothing but agree, and they divided.

As soon as they entered the marsh, the two dogs began hunting
about together and made towards the green, slime-covered pool.
Levin knew Laska's method, wary and indefinite; he knew the place
too and expected a whole covey of snipe.

"Veslovsky, beside me, walk beside me!" he said in a faint voice
to his companion splashing in the water behind him.  Levin could
not help feeling an interest in the direction his gun was
pointed, after that casual shot near the Kolpensky marsh.

"Oh, I won't get in your way, don't trouble about me."

But Levin could not help troubling, and recalled Kitty's words at
parting: "Mind you don't shoot one another."  The dogs came
nearer and nearer, passed each other, each pursuing its own
scent.  The expectation of snipe was so intense that to Levin the
squelching sound of his own heel, as he drew it up out of the
mire, seemed to be the call of a snipe, and he clutched and
pressed the lock of his gun.

"Bang! bang!" sounded almost in his ear.  Vassenka had fired at a
flock of ducks which was hovering over the marsh and flying at
that moment towards the sportsmen, far out of range.  Before
Levin had time to look round, there was the whir of one snipe,
another, a third, and some eight more rose one after another.

Stepan Arkadyevitch hit one at the very moment when it was
beginning its zigzag movements, and the snipe fell in a heap into
the mud.  Oblonsky aimed deliberately at another, still flying
low in the reeds, and together with the report of the shot, that
snipe too fell, and it could be seen fluttering out where the
sedge had been cut, its unhurt wing showing white beneath.

Levin was not so lucky: he aimed at his first bird too low, and
missed; he aimed at it again, just as it was rising, but at that
instant another snipe flew up at his very feet, distracting him
so that he missed again.

While they were loading their guns, another snipe rose, and
Veslovsky, who had had time to load again, sent two charges of
small-shot into the water.  Stepan Arkadyevitch picked up his
snipe, and with sparkling eyes looked at Levin.

"Well, now let us separate," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and
limping on his left foot, holding his gun in readiness and
whistling to his dog, he walked off in one direction.  Levin and
Veslovsky walked in the other.

It always happened with Levin that when his first shots were a
failure he got hot and out of temper, and shot badly the whole
day.  So it was that day.  The snipe showed themselves in
numbers.  They kept flying up from just under the dogs, from
under the sportsmen's legs, and Levin might have retrieved his
ill luck.  But the more he shot, the more he felt disgraced in
the eyes of Veslovsky, who kept popping away merrily and
indiscriminately, killing nothing, and not in the slightest
abashed by his ill success.  Levin, in feverish haste, could not
restrain himself, got more and more out of temper, and ended by
shooting almost without a hope of hitting.  Laska, indeed, seemed
to understand this.  She began looking more languidly, and gazed
back at the sportsmen, as it were, with perplexity or reproach in
her eyes.  Shots followed shots in rapid succession.  The smoke
of the powder hung about the sportsmen, while in the great roomy
net of the game bag there were only three light little snipe.
And of these one had been killed by Veslovsky alone, and one by
both of them together.  Meanwhile from the other side of the
marsh came the sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch's shots, not
frequent, but, as Levin fancied, well-directed, for almost after
each they heard "Krak, Krak, _apporte_!"

This excited Levin still more.  The snipe were floating
continually in the air over the reeds.  Their whirring wings
close to the earth, and their harsh cries high in the air, could
be heard on all sides; the snipe that had risen first and flown
up into the air, settled again before the sportsmen.  Instead of
two hawks there were now dozens of them hovering with shrill
cries over the marsh.

After walking through the larger half of the marsh, Levin and
Veslovsky reached the place where the peasants' mowing-grass was
divided into long strips reaching to the reeds, marked off in one
place by the trampled grass, in another by a path mown through
it.  Half of these strips had already been mown.

Though there was not so much hope of finding birds in the uncut
part as the cut part, Levin had promised Stepan Arkadyevitch to
meet him, and so he walked on with his companion through the cut
and uncut patches.

"Hi, sportsmen!" shouted one of a group of peasants, sitting on
an unharnessed cart; "come and have some lunch with us!  Have a
drop of wine!"

Levin looked round.

"Come along, it's all right!" shouted a good-humored-looking
bearded peasant with a red face, showing his white teeth in a
grin, and holding up a greenish bottle that flashed in the
sunlight.

"_Qu'est-ce qu'ils disent_?" asked Veslovsky.

"They invite you to have some vodka.  Most likely they've been
dividing the meadow into lots.  I should have some," said Levin,
not without some guile, hoping Veslovsky would be tempted by the
vodka, and would go away to them.

"Why do they offer it?"

"Oh, they're merry-making.  Really, you should join them.  You
would be interested."

"_Allons, c'est curieux_."

"You go, you go, you'll find the way to the mill!" cried Levin,
and looking round he perceived with satisfaction that Veslovsky,
bent and stumbling with weariness, holding his gun out at arm's
length, was making his way out of the marsh towards the
peasants.

"You come too!" the peasants shouted to Levin.  "Never fear!  You
taste our cake!"

Levin felt a strong inclination to drink a little vodka and to
eat some bread.  He was exhausted, and felt it a great effort to
drag his staggering legs out of the mire, and for a minute he
hesitated.  But Laska was setting.  And immediately all his
weariness vanished, and he walked lightly through the swamp
towards the dog.  A snipe flew up at his feet; he fired and
killed it.  Laska still pointed.--"Fetch it!"  Another bird flew
up close to the dog.  Levin fired.  But it was an unlucky day for
him; he missed it, and when he went to look for the one he had
shot, he could not find that either.  He wandered all about the
reeds, but Laska did not believe he had shot it, and when he sent
her to find it, she pretended to hunt for it, but did not really.
And in the absence of Vassenka, on whom Levin threw the blame of
his failure, things went no better.  There were plenty of snipe
still, but Levin made one miss after another.

The slanting rays of the sun were still hot; his clothes, soaked
through with perspiration, stuck to his body; his left boot full
of water weighed heavily on his leg and squeaked at every step;
the sweat ran in drops down his powder-grimed face, his mouth
was full of the bitter taste, his nose of the smell of powder and
stagnant water, his ears were ringing with the incessant whir of
the snipe; he could not touch the stock of his gun, it was so
hot; his heart beat with short, rapid throbs; his hands shook
with excitement, and his weary legs stumbled and staggered over
the hillocks and in the swamp, but still he walked on and still
he shot.  At last, after a disgraceful miss, he flung his gun and
his hat on the ground.

"No, I must control myself," he said to himself.  Picking up his
gun and his hat, he called Laska, and went out of the swamp.
When he got on to dry ground he sat down, pulled off his boot and
emptied it, then walked to the marsh, drank some stagnant-tasting
water, moistened his burning hot gun, and washed his face and
hands.  Feeling refreshed, he went back to the spot where a snipe
had settled, firmly resolved to keep cool.

He tried to be calm, but it was the same again.  His finger
pressed the cock before he had taken a good aim at the bird.  It
got worse and worse.

He had only five birds in his game-bag when he walked out of the
marsh towards the alders where he was to rejoin Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

Before he caught sight of Stepan Arkadyevitch he saw his dog.
Krak darted out from behind the twisted root of an alder, black
all over with the stinking mire of the marsh, and with the air of
a conqueror sniffed at Laska.  Behind Krak there came into view
in the shade of the alder tree the shapely figure of Stepan
Arkadyevitch.  He came to meet him, red and perspiring, with
unbuttoned neckband, still limping in the same way.

"Well?  You have been popping away!" he said, smiling
good-humoredly.

"How have you got on?" queried Levin.  But there was no need to
ask, for he had already seen the full game bag.

"Oh, pretty fair."

He had fourteen birds.

"A splendid marsh!  I've no doubt Veslovsky got in your way.
It's awkward too, shooting with one dog," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, to soften his triumph.


Chapter 11


When Levin and Stepan Arkadyevitch reached the peasant's hut
where Levin always used to stay, Veslovsky was already there.  He
was sitting in the middle of the hut, clinging with both hands to
the bench from which he was being pulled by a soldier, the
brother of the peasant's wife, who was helping him off with his
miry boots.  Veslovsky was laughing his infectious, good-humored
laugh.

"I've only just come.  _Ils ont été charmants_.  Just fancy, they
gave me drink, fed me!  Such bread, it was exquisite!  _Delicieux!_
And the vodka, I never tasted any better.  And they would not
take a penny for anything.  And they kept saying: 'Excuse our
homely ways.'"

"What should they take anything for?  They were entertaining you,
to be sure.  Do you suppose they keep vodka for sale?" said the
soldier, succeeding at last in pulling the soaked boot off the
blackened stocking.

In spite of the dirtiness of the hut, which was all muddied by
their boots and the filthy dogs licking themselves clean, and the
smell of marsh mud and powder that filled the room, and the
absence of knives and forks, the party drank their tea and ate
their supper with a relish only known to sportsmen.  Washed and
clean, they went into a hay-barn swept ready for them, where the
coachman had been making up beds for the gentlemen.

Though it was dusk, not one of them wanted to go to sleep.

After wavering among reminiscences and anecdotes of guns, of
dogs, and of former shooting parties, the conversation rested on
a topic that interested all of them.  After Vassenka had several
times over expressed his appreciation of this delightful
sleeping place among the fragrant hay, this delightful broken
cart (he supposed it to be broken because the shafts had been
taken out), of the good nature of the peasants that had treated
him to vodka, of the dogs who lay at the feet of their respective
masters, Oblonsky began telling them of a delightful shooting
party at Malthus's, where he had stayed the previous summer.

Malthus was a well-known capitalist, who had made his money by
speculation in railway shares.  Stepan Arkadyevitch described
what grouse moors this Malthus had bought in the Tver province,
and how they were preserved, and of the carriages and dogcarts in
which the shooting party had been driven, and the luncheon
pavilion that had been rigged up at the marsh.

"I don't understand you," said Levin, sitting up in the hay; "how
is it such people don't disgust you?  I can understand a lunch
with Lafitte is all very pleasant, but don't you dislike just
that very sumptuousness?  All these people, just like our spirit
monopolists in old days, get their money in a way that gains them
the contempt of everyone.  They don't care for their contempt,
and then they use their dishonest gains to buy off the contempt
they have deserved."

"Perfectly true!" chimed in Vassenka Veslovsky.  "Perfectly!
Oblonsky, of course, goes out of _bonhomie_, but other people say:
'Well, Oblonsky stays with them.'..."

"Not a bit of it." Levin could hear that Oblonsky was smiling as
he spoke.  "I simply don't consider him more dishonest than any
other wealthy merchant or nobleman.  They've all made their money
alike--by their work and their intelligence."

"Oh, by what work?  Do you call it work to get hold of
concessions and speculate with them?"

"Of course it's work.  Work in this sense, that if it were not
for him and others like him, there would have been no railways."

"But that's not work, like the work of a peasant or a learned
profession."

"Granted, but it's work in the sense that his activity produces a
result--the railways.  But of course you think the railways
useless."

"No, that's another question; I am prepared to admit that
they're useful.  But all profit that is out of proportion to the
labor expended is dishonest."

"But who is to define what is proportionate?"

"Making profit by dishonest means, by trickery," said Levin,
conscious that he could not draw a distinct line between honesty
and dishonesty.  "Such as banking, for instance," he went on.
"It's an evil--the amassing of huge fortunes without labor, just
the same thing as with the spirit monopolies, it's only the form
that's changed.  _Le roi est mort, vive le roi_.  No sooner were
the spirit monopolies abolished than the railways came up, and
banking companies; that, too, is profit without work."

"Yes, that may all be very true and clever....  Lie down, Krak!"
Stepan Arkadyevitch called to his dog, who was scratching and
turning over all the hay.  He was obviously convinced of the
correctness of his position, and so talked serenely and without
haste.  "But you have not drawn the line between honest and
dishonest work.  That I receive a bigger salary than my chief
clerk, though he knows more about the work than I do--that's
dishonest, I suppose?"

"I can't say."

"Well, but I can tell you: your receiving some five thousand,
let's say, for your work on the land, while our host, the peasant
here, however hard he works, can never get more than fifty
roubles, is just as dishonest as my earning more than my chief
clerk, and Malthus getting more than a station-master.  No, quite
the contrary; I see that society takes up a sort of antagonistic
attitude to these people, which is utterly baseless, and I fancy
there's envy at the bottom of it...."

"No, that's unfair," said Veslovsky; "how could envy come in?
There is something not nice about that sort of business."

"You say," Levin went on, "that it's unjust for me to receive
five thousand, while the peasant has fifty; that's true.  It is
unfair, and I feel it, but..."

"It really is.  Why is it we spend our time riding, drinking,
shooting, doing nothing, while they are forever at work?" said
Vassenka Veslovsky, obviously for the first time in his life
reflecting on the question, and consequently considering it with
perfect sincerity.

"Yes, you feel it, but you don't give him your property," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, intentionally, as it seemed, provoking
Levin.

There had arisen of late something like a secret antagonism
between the two brothers-in-law; as though, since they had
married sisters, a kind of rivalry had sprung up between them as
to which was ordering his life best, and now this hostility
showed itself in the conversation, as it began to take a personal
note.

"I don't give it away, because no one demands that from me, and
if I wanted to, I could not give it away," answered Levin, "and
have no one to give it to."

"Give it to this peasant, he would not refuse it."

"Yes, but how am I to give it up?  Am I to go to him and make a
deed of conveyance?"

"I don't know; but if you are convinced that you have no
right..."

"I'm not at all convinced.  On the contrary, I feel I have no
right to give it up, that I have duties both to the land and to
my family."

"No, excuse me, but if you consider this inequality is unjust,
why is it you don't act accordingly?..."

"Well, I do act negatively on that idea, so far as not trying to
increase the difference of position existing between him and me."

"No, excuse me, that's a paradox."

"Yes, there's something of a sophistry about that," Veslovsky
agreed.  "Ah! our host; so you're not asleep yet?" he said to the
peasant who came into the barn, opening the creaking door.  "How
is it you're not asleep?"

"No, how's one to sleep!  I thought our gentlemen would be
asleep, but I heard them chattering.  I want to get a hook from
here.  She won't bite?" he added, stepping cautiously with his
bare feet.

"And where are you going to sleep?"

"We are going out for the night with the beasts."

"Ah, what a night!" said Veslovsky, looking out at the edge of
the hut and the unharnessed wagonette that could be seen in the
faint light of the evening glow in the great frame of the open
doors.  "But listen, there are women's voices singing, and, on my
word, not badly too.  Who's that singing, my friend?"

"That's the maids from hard by here."

"Let's go, let's have a walk!  We shan't go to sleep, you know.
Oblonsky, come along!"

"If one could only do both, lie here and go," answered Oblonsky,
stretching.  "It's capital lying here."

"Well, I shall go by myself," said Veslovsky, getting up
eagerly, and putting on his shoes and stockings.  "Good-bye,
gentlemen.  If it's fun, I'll fetch you.  You've treated me to
some good sport, and I won't forget you."

"He really is a capital fellow, isn't he?" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, when Veslovsky had gone out and the peasant had
closed the door after him.

"Yes, capital," answered Levin, still thinking of the subject of
their conversation just before.  It seemed to him that he had
clearly expressed his thoughts and feelings to the best of his
capacity, and yet both of them, straightforward men and not
fools, had said with one voice that he was comforting himself
with sophistries.  This disconcerted him.

"It's just this, my dear boy.  One must do one of two things:
either admit that the existing order of society is just, and then
stick up for one's rights in it; or acknowledge that you are
enjoying unjust privileges, as I do, and then enjoy them and be
satisfied."

"No, if it were unjust, you could not enjoy these advantages and
be satisfied--at least I could not.  The great thing for me is
to feel that I'm not to blame."

"What do you say, why not go after all?" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, evidently weary of the strain of thought.  "We
shan't go to sleep, you know.  Come, let's go!"

Levin did not answer.  What they had said in the conversation,
that he acted justly only in a negative sense, absorbed his
thoughts.  "Can it be that it's only possible to be just
negatively?" he was asking himself.

"How strong the smell of the fresh hay is, though," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, getting up.  "There's not a chance of sleeping.
Vassenka has been getting up some fun there.  Do you hear the
laughing and his voice?  Hadn't we better go?  Come along!"

"No, I'm not coming," answered Levin.

"Surely that's not a matter of principle too," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling, as he felt about in the dark for his cap.

"It's not a matter of principle, but why should I go?"

"But do you know you are preparing trouble for yourself," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, finding his cap and getting up.

"How so?"

"Do you suppose I don't see the line you've taken up with your
wife?  I heard how it's a question of the greatest consequence,
whether or not you're to be away for a couple of days' shooting.
That's all very well as an idyllic episode, but for your whole
life that won't answer.  A man must be independent; he has his
masculine interests.  A man has to be manly," said Oblonsky,
opening the door.

"In what way?  To go running after servant girls?" said Levin.

"Why not, if it amuses him?  _Ça ne tire pas a consequence_.  It
won't do my wife any harm, and it'll amuse me.  The great thing
is to respect the sanctity of the home.  There should be nothing
in the home.  But don't tie your own hands."

"Perhaps so," said Levin dryly, and he turned on his side.
"Tomorrow, early, I want to go shooting, and I won't wake anyone,
and shall set off at daybreak."

"_Messieurs, venez vite!_" they heard the voice of Veslovsky coming
back.  "_Charmante!_  I've made such a discovery.  _Charmante!_ a
perfect Gretchen, and I've already made friends with her.
Really, exceedingly pretty," he declared in a tone of approval,
as though she had been made pretty entirely on his account, and
he was expressing his satisfaction with the entertainment that
had been provided for him.

Levin pretended to be asleep, while Oblonsky, putting on his
slippers, and lighting a cigar, walked out of the barn, and soon
their voices were lost.

For a long while Levin could not get to sleep.  He heard the
horses munching hay, then he heard the peasant and his elder boy
getting ready for the night, and going off for the night watch
with the beasts, then he heard the soldier arranging his bed on
the other side of the barn, with his nephew, the younger son of
their peasant host.  He heard the boy in his shrill little voice
telling his uncle what he thought about the dogs, who seemed to
him huge and terrible creatures, and asking what the dogs were
going to hunt next day, and the soldier in a husky, sleepy voice,
telling him the sportsmen were going in the morning to the marsh,
and would shoot with their guns; and then, to check the boy's
questions, he said, "Go to sleep, Vaska; go to sleep, or you'll
catch it," and soon after he began snoring himself, and
everything was still.  He could only hear the snort of the
horses, and the guttural cry of a snipe.

"Is it really only negative?" he repeated to himself.  "Well,
what of it?  It's not my fault." And he began thinking about the
next day.

"Tomorrow I'll go out early, and I'll make a point of keeping
cool.  There are lots of snipe; and there are grouse too.  When
I come back there'll be the note from Kitty.  Yes, Stiva may be
right, I'm not manly with her, I'm tied to her apron-strings....
Well, it can't be helped!  Negative again...."

Half asleep, he heard the laughter and mirthful talk of Veslovsky
and Stepan Arkadyevitch.  For an instant he opened his eyes: the
moon was up, and in the open doorway, brightly lighted up by the
moonlight, they were standing talking.  Stepan Arkadyevitch was
saying something of the freshness of one girl, comparing her to a
freshly peeled nut, and Veslovsky with his infectious laugh was
repeating some words, probably said to him by a peasant: "Ah, you
do your best to get round her!" Levin, half asleep, said:

"Gentlemen, tomorrow before daylight!" and fell asleep.


Chapter 12


Waking up at earliest dawn, Levin tried to wake his companions.
Vassenka, lying on his stomach, with one leg in a stocking thrust
out, was sleeping so soundly that he could elicit no response.
Oblonsky, half asleep, declined to get up so early.  Even Laska,
who was asleep, curled up in the hay, got up unwillingly, and
lazily stretched out and straightened her hind legs one after the
other.  Getting on his boots and stockings, taking his gun, and
carefully opening the creaking door of the barn, Levin went out
into the road.  The coachmen were sleeping in their carriages,
the horses were dozing.  Only one was lazily eating oats, dipping
its nose into the manger.  It was still gray out-of-doors.

"Why are you up so early, my dear?" the old woman, their hostess,
said, coming out of the hut and addressing him affectionately as
an old friend.

"Going shooting, granny.  Do I go this way to the marsh?"

"Straight out at the back; by our threshing floor, my dear, and
hemp patches; there's a little footpath."  Stepping carefully
with her sunburnt, bare feet, the old woman conducted Levin, and
moved back the fence for him by the threshing floor.

"Straight on and you'll come to the marsh.  Our lads drove the
cattle there yesterday evening."

Laska ran eagerly forward along the little path.  Levin followed
her with a light, rapid step, continually looking at the sky.  He
hoped the sun would not be up before he reached the marsh.  But
the sun did not delay.  The moon, which had been bright when he
went out, by now shone only like a crescent of quicksilver.  The
pink flush of dawn, which one could not help seeing before, now
had to be sought to be discerned at all.  What were before
undefined, vague blurs in the distant countryside could now be
distinctly seen.  They were sheaves of rye.  The dew, not visible
till the sun was up, wetted Levin's legs and his blouse above his
belt in the high growing, fragrant hemp patch, from which the
pollen had already fallen out.  In the transparent stillness of
morning the smallest sounds were audible.  A bee flew by Levin's
ear with the whizzing sound of a bullet.  He looked carefully,
and saw a second and a third.  They were all flying from the
beehives behind the hedge, and they disappeared over the hemp
patch in the direction of the marsh.  The path led straight to
the marsh.  The marsh could be recognized by the mist which rose
from it, thicker in one place and thinner in another, so that the
reeds and willow bushes swayed like islands in this mist.  At the
edge of the marsh and the road, peasant boys and men, who had
been herding for the night, were lying, and in the dawn all were
asleep under their coats.  Not far from them were three hobbled
horses.  One of them clanked a chain.  Laska walked beside her
master, pressing a little forward and looking round.  Passing the
sleeping peasants and reaching the first reeds, Levin examined
his pistols and let his dog off.  One of the horses, a sleek,
dark-brown three-year-old, seeing the dog, started away, switched
its tail and snorted.  The other horses too were frightened, and
splashing through the water with their hobbled legs, and drawing
their hoofs out of the thick mud with a squelching sound, they
bounded out of the marsh.  Laska stopped, looking ironically at
the horses and inquiringly at Levin.  Levin patted Laska, and
whistled as a sign that she might begin.

Laska ran joyfully and anxiously through the slush that swayed
under her.

Running into the marsh among the familiar scents of roots, marsh
plants, and slime, and the extraneous smell of horse dung, Laska
detected at once a smell that pervaded the whole marsh, the scent
of that strong-smelling bird that always excited her more than
any other.  Here and there among the moss and marsh plants this
scent was very strong, but it was impossible to determine in
which direction it grew stronger or fainter.  To find the
direction, she had to go farther away from the wind.  Not feeling
the motion of her legs, Laska bounded with a stiff gallop, so
that at each bound she could stop short, to the right, away from
the wind that blew from the east before sunrise, and turned
facing the wind.  Sniffing in the air with dilated nostrils, she
felt at once that not their tracks only but they themselves were
here before her, and not one, but many.  Laska slackened her
speed.  They were here, but where precisely she could not yet
determine.  To find the very spot, she began to make a circle,
when suddenly her master's voice drew her off.  "Laska! here?" he
asked, pointing her to a different direction.  She stopped,
asking him if she had better not go on doing as she had begun.
But he repeated his command in an angry voice, pointing to a spot
covered with water, where there could not be anything.  She
obeyed him, pretending she was looking, so as to please him, went
round it, and went back to her former position, and was at once
aware of the scent again.  Now when he was not hindering her, she
knew what to do, and without looking at what was under her feet,
and to her vexation stumbling over a high stump into the water,
but righting herself with her strong, supple legs, she began
making the circle which was to make all clear to her.  The scent
of them reached her, stronger and stronger, and more and more
defined, and all at once it became perfectly clear to her that
one of them was here, behind this tuft of reeds, five paces in
front of her; she stopped, and her whole body was still and
rigid.  On her short legs she could see nothing in front of her,
but by the scent she knew it was sitting not more than five paces
off.  She stood still, feeling more and more conscious of it, and
enjoying it in anticipation.  Her tail was stretched straight and
tense, and only wagging at the extreme end.  Her mouth was
slightly open, her ears raised.  One ear had been turned wrong
side out as she ran up, and she breathed heavily but warily, and
still more warily looked round, but more with her eyes than her
head, to her master.  He was coming along with the face she knew
so well, though the eyes were always terrible to her.  He
stumbled over the stump as he came, and moved, as she thought,
extraordinarily slowly.  She thought he came slowly, but he was
running.

Noticing Laska's special attitude as she crouched on the ground,
as it were, scratching big prints with her hind paws, and with
her mouth slightly open, Levin knew she was pointing at grouse,
and with an inward prayer for luck, especially with the first
bird, he ran up to her.  Coming quite close up to her, he could
from his height look beyond her, and he saw with his eyes what
she was seeing with her nose.  In a space between two little
thickets, at a couple of yards' distance, he could see a
grouse.  Turning its head, it was listening.  Then lightly
preening and folding its wings, it disappeared round a corner
with a clumsy wag of its tail.

"Fetch it, fetch it!" shouted Levin, giving Laska a shove from
behind.

"But I can't go," thought Laska.  "Where am I to go?  From here I
feel them, but if I move forward I shall know nothing of where
they are or who they are."  But then he shoved her with his knee,
and in an excited whisper said, "Fetch it, Laska."

"Well, if that's what he wishes, I'll do it, but I can't answer
for myself now," she thought, and darted forward as fast as her
legs would carry her between the thick bushes.  She scented
nothing now; she could only see and hear, without understanding
anything.

Ten paces from her former place a grouse rose with a guttural cry
and the peculiar round sound of its wings.  And immediately after
the shot it splashed heavily with its white breast on the wet
mire.  Another bird did not linger, but rose behind Levin without
the dog.  When Levin turned towards it, it was already some way
off.  But his shot caught it.  Flying twenty paces further, the
second grouse rose upwards, and whirling round like a ball,
dropped heavily on a dry place.

"Come, this is going to be some good!" thought Levin, packing the
warm and fat grouse into his game bag.  "Eh, Laska, will it be
good?"

When Levin, after loading his gun, moved on, the sun had fully
risen, though unseen behind the storm-clouds.  The moon had lost
all of its luster, and was like a white cloud in the sky.  Not a
single star could be seen.  The sedge, silvery with dew before,
now shone like gold.  The stagnant pools were all like amber.
The blue of the grass had changed to yellow-green.  The marsh
birds twittered and swarmed about the brook and upon the bushes
that glittered with dew and cast long shadows.  A hawk woke up
and settled on a haycock, turning its head from side to side and
looking discontentedly at the marsh.  Crows were flying about the
field, and a bare-legged boy was driving the horses to an old
man, who had got up from under his long coat and was combing his
hair.  The smoke from the gun was white as milk over the green of
the grass.

One of the boys ran up to Levin.

"Uncle, there were ducks here yesterday!" he shouted to him, and
he walked a little way off behind him.

And Levin was doubly pleased, in sight of the boy, who expressed
his approval, at killing three snipe, one after another, straight
off.


Chapter 13


The sportsman's saying, that if the first beast or the first bird
is not missed, the day will be lucky, turned out correct.

At ten o'clock Levin, weary, hungry, and happy after a tramp of
twenty miles, returned to his night's lodging with nineteen head
of fine game and one duck, which he tied to his belt, as it would
not go into the game bag.  His companions had long been awake,
and had had time to get hungry and have breakfast.

"Wait a bit, wait a bit, I know there are nineteen," said Levin,
counting a second time over the grouse and snipe, that looked so
much less important now, bent and dry and bloodstained, with
heads crooked aside, than they did when they were flying.

The number was verified, and Stepan Arkadyevitch's envy pleased
Levin.  He was pleased too on returning to find the man sent by
Kitty with a note was already there.

"I am perfectly well and happy.  If you were uneasy about me, you
can feel easier than ever.  I've a new bodyguard, Marya
Vlasyevna,"--this was the midwife, a new and important personage
in Levin's domestic life.  "She has come to have a look at me.
She found me perfectly well, and we have kept her till you are
back.  All are happy and well, and please, don't be in a hurry to
come back, but, if the sport is good, stay another day."

These two pleasures, his lucky shooting and the letter from his
wife, were so great that two slightly disagreeable incidents
passed lightly over Levin.  One was that the chestnut trace
horse, who had been unmistakably overworked on the previous day,
was off his feed and out of sorts.  The coachman said he was
"Overdriven yesterday, Konstantin Dmitrievitch.  Yes, indeed!
driven ten miles with no sense!"

The other unpleasant incident, which for the first minute
destroyed his good humor, though later he laughed at it a great
deal, was to find that of all the provisions Kitty had provided
in such abundance that one would have thought there was enough
for a week, nothing was left.  On his way back, tired and hungry
from shooting, Levin had so distinct a vision of meat-pies that
as he approached the hut he seemed to smell and taste them, as
Laska had smelt the game, and he immediately told Philip to give
him some.  It appeared that there were no pies left, nor even any
chicken.

"Well, this fellow's appetite!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
laughing and pointing at Vassenka Veslovsky.  "I never suffer
from loss of appetite, but he's really marvelous!..."

"Well, it can't be helped," said Levin, looking gloomily at
Veslovsky.  "Well, Philip, give me some beef, then."

"The beef's been eaten, and the bones given to the dogs,"
answered Philip.

Levin was so hurt that he said, in a tone of vexation, "You might
have left me something!" and he felt ready to cry.

"Then put away the game," he said in a shaking voice to Philip,
trying not to look at Vassenka, "and cover them with some
nettles.  And you might at least ask for some milk for me."

But when he had drunk some milk, he felt ashamed immediately at
having shown his annoyance to a stranger, and he began to laugh
at his hungry mortification.

In the evening they went shooting again, and Veslovsky had
several successful shots, and in the night they drove home.

Their homeward journey was as lively as their drive out had been.
Veslovsky sang songs and related with enjoyment his adventures
with the peasants, who had regaled him with vodka, and said to
him, "Excuse our homely ways," and his night's adventures with
kiss-in-the-ring and the servant-girl and the peasant, who had
asked him was he married, and on learning that he was not, said
to him, "Well, mind you don't run after other men's wives--you'd
better get one of your own."  These words had particularly amused
Veslovsky.

"Altogether, I've enjoyed our outing awfully.  And you, Levin?"

"I have, very much," Levin said quite sincerely.  It was
particularly delightful to him to have got rid of the hostility
he had been feeling towards Vassenka Veslovsky at home, and to
feel instead the most friendly disposition to him.



Chapter 14


Next day at ten o'clock Levin, who had already gone his rounds,
knocked at the room where Vassenka had been put for the night.

"_Entrez!_" Veslovsky called to him.  "Excuse me, I've only just
finished my ablutions," he said, smiling, standing before him in
his underclothes only.

"Don't mind me, please."  Levin sat down in the window.  "Have
you slept well?"

"Like the dead.  What sort of day is it for shooting?"

"What will you take, tea or coffee?"

"Neither.  I'll wait till lunch.  I'm really ashamed.  I suppose
the ladies are down?  A walk now would be capital.  You show me
your horses."

After walking about the garden, visiting the stable, and even
doing some gymnastic exercises together on the parallel bars,
Levin returned to the house with his guest, and went with him
into the drawing room.

"We had splendid shooting, and so many delightful experiences!"
said Veslovsky, going up to Kitty, who was sitting at the
samovar.  "What a pity ladies are cut off from these delights!"

"Well, I suppose he must say something to the lady of the house,"
Levin said to himself.  Again he fancied something in the smile,
in the all-conquering air with which their guest addressed
Kitty....

The princess, sitting on the other side of the table with Marya
Vlasyevna and Stepan Arkadyevitch, called Levin to her side, and
began to talk to him about moving to Moscow for Kitty's
confinement, and getting ready rooms for them.   Just as Levin
had disliked all the trivial preparations for his wedding, as
derogatory to the grandeur of the event, now he felt still more
offensive the preparations for the approaching birth, the date of
which they reckoned, it seemed, on their fingers.  He tried to
turn a deaf ear to these discussions of the best patterns of long
clothes for the coming baby; tried to turn away and avoid seeing
the mysterious, endless strips of knitting, the triangles of
linen, and so on, to which Dolly attached special importance.
The birth of a son (he was certain it would be a son) which was
promised him, but which he still could not believe in--so
marvelous it seemed--presented itself to his mind, on one hand,
as a happiness so immense, and therefore so incredible; on the
other, as an event so mysterious, that this assumption of a
definite knowledge of what would be, and consequent preparation
for it, as for something ordinary that did happen to people,
jarred on him as confusing and humiliating.

But the princess did not understand his feelings, and put down
his reluctance to think and talk about it to carelessness and
indifference, and so she gave him no peace.  She had commissioned
Stepan Arkadyevitch to look at a flat, and now she called Levin
up.

"I know nothing about it, princess.  Do as you think fit," he
said.

"You must decide when you will move."

"I really don't know.  I know millions of children are born away
from Moscow, and doctors...why..."

"But if so..."

"Oh, no, as Kitty wishes."

"We can't talk to Kitty about it!  Do you want me to frighten
her?  Why, this spring Natalia Golitzina died from having an
ignorant doctor."

"I will do just what you say," he said gloomily.

The princess began talking to him, but he did not hear her.
Though the conversation with the princess had indeed jarred upon
him, he was gloomy, not on account of that conversation, but from
what he saw at the samovar.

"No, it's impossible," he thought, glancing now and then at
Vassenka bending over Kitty, telling her something with his
charming smile, and at her, flushed and disturbed.

There was something not nice in Vassenka's attitude, in his eyes,
in his smile.  Levin even saw something not nice in Kitty's
attitude and look.  And again the light died away in his eyes.
Again, as before, all of a sudden, without the slightest
transition, he felt cast down from a pinnacle of happiness,
peace, and dignity, into an abyss of despair, rage, and
humiliation.  Again everything and everyone had become hateful to
him.

"You do just as you think best, princess," he said again, looking
round.

"Heavy is the cap of Monomach," Stepan Arkadyevitch said
playfully, hinting, evidently, not simply at the princess's
conversation, but at the cause of Levin's agitation, which he had
noticed.

"How late you are today, Dolly!"

Everyone got up to greet Darya Alexandrovna.  Vassenka only rose
for an instant, and with the lack of courtesy to ladies
characteristic of the modern young man, he scarcely bowed, and
resumed his conversation again, laughing at something.

"I've been worried about Masha.  She did not sleep well, and is
dreadfully tiresome today," said Dolly.

The conversation Vassenka had started with Kitty was running on
the same lines as on the previous evening, discussing Anna, and
whether love is to be put higher than worldly considerations.
Kitty disliked the conversation, and she was disturbed both by
the subject and the tone in which it was conducted, and also by
the knowledge of the effect it would have on her husband.  But
she was too simple and innocent to know how to cut short this
conversation, or even to conceal the superficial pleasure
afforded her by the young man's very obvious admiration.  She
wanted to stop it, but she did not know what to do.  Whatever she
did she knew would be observed by her husband, and the worst
interpretation put on it.  And, in fact, when she asked Dolly
what was wrong with Masha, and Vassenka, waiting till this
uninteresting conversation was over, began to gaze indifferently
at Dolly, the question struck Levin as an unnatural and
disgusting piece of hypocrisy.

"What do you say, shall we go and look for mushrooms today?" said
Dolly.

"By all means, please, and I shall come too," said Kitty, and she
blushed.  She wanted from politeness to ask Vassenka whether he
would come, and she did not ask him.  "Where are you going,
Kostya?" she asked her husband with a guilty face, as he passed
by her with a resolute step.  This guilty air confirmed all his
suspicions.

"The mechanician came when I was away; I haven't seen him yet,"
he said, not looking at her.

He went downstairs, but before he had time to leave his study he
heard his wife's familiar footsteps running with reckless speed
to him.

"What do you want?" he said to her shortly.  "We are busy."

"I beg your pardon," she said to the German mechanician; "I want
a few words with my husband."

The German would have left the room, but Levin said to him:

"Don't disturb yourself."

"The train is at three?" queried the German.  "I mustn't be
late."

Levin did not answer him, but walked out himself with his wife.

"Well, what have you to say to me?" he said to her in French.

He did not look her in the face, and did not care to see that she
in her condition was trembling all over, and had a piteous,
crushed look.

"I...I want to say that we can't go on like this; that this
is misery..." she said.

"The servants are here at the sideboard," he said angrily; "don't
make a scene."

"Well, let's go in here!"

They were standing in the passage.  Kitty would have gone into
the next room, but there the English governess was giving Tanya a
lesson.

"Well, come into the garden."

In the garden they came upon a peasant weeding the path.  And no
longer considering that the peasant could see her tear-stained
and his agitated face, that they looked like people fleeing from
some disaster, they went on with rapid steps, feeling that they
must speak out and clear up misunderstandings, must be alone
together, and so get rid of the misery they were both feeling.

"We can't go on like this! It's misery! I am wretched; you are
wretched.  What for?" she said, when they had at last reached a
solitary garden seat at a turn in the lime tree avenue.

"But tell me one thing: was there in his tone anything unseemly,
not nice, humiliatingly horrible?" he said, standing before her
again in the same position with his clenched fists on his chest,
as he had stood before her that night.

"Yes," she said in a shaking voice; "but, Kostya, surely you see
I'm not to blame?  All the morning I've been trying to take a
tone...but such people ...Why did he come?  How happy we were!"
she said, breathless with the sobs that shook her.

Although nothing had been pursuing them, and there was nothing to
run away from, and they could not possibly have found anything
very delightful on that garden seat, the gardener saw with
astonishment that they passed him on their way home with
comforted and radiant faces.



Chapter 15


After escorting his wife upstairs, Levin went to Dolly's part of
the house.  Darya Alexandrovna, for her part, was in great
distress too that day.  She was walking about the room, talking
angrily to a little girl, who stood in the corner roaring.

"And you shall stand all day in the corner, and have your dinner
all alone, and not see one of your dolls, and I won't make you a
new frock," she said, not knowing how to punish her.

"Oh, she is a disgusting child!" she turned to Levin.  "Where
does she get such wicked propensities?"

"Why, what has she done?" Levin said without much interest, for
he had wanted to ask her advice, and so was annoyed that he had
come at an unlucky moment.

"Grisha and she went into the raspberries, and there...I can't
tell you really what she did.  It's a thousand pities Miss
Elliot's not with us.  This one sees to nothing--she's a
machine....  _Figurez-vous que la petite_?..."

And Darya Alexandrovna described Masha's crime.

"That proves nothing; it's not a question of evil propensities at
all, it's simply mischief," Levin assured her.

"But you are upset about something?  What have you come for?"
asked Dolly.  "What's going on there?"

And in the tone of her question Levin heard that it would be easy
for him to say what he had meant to say.

"I've not been in there, I've been alone in the garden with
Kitty.  We've had a quarrel for the second time since...Stiva
came."

Dolly looked at him with her shrewd, comprehending eyes.

"Come, tell me, honor bright, has there been...not in Kitty, but
in that gentleman's behavior, a tone which might be unpleasant--
not unpleasant, but horrible, offensive to a husband?"

"You mean, how shall I say....  Stay, stay in the corner!" she
said to Masha, who, detecting a faint smile in her mother's face,
had been turning round.  "The opinion of the world would be that
he is behaving as young men do behave.  _Il fait la cour à une
jeune et jolie femme_, and a husband who's a man of the world
should only be flattered by it."

"Yes, yes," said Levin gloomily; "but you noticed it?"

"Not only I, but Stiva noticed it.  Just after breakfast he said
to me in so many words, _Je crois que Veslovsky fait un petit brin
de cour à Kitty_."

"Well, that's all right then; now I'm satisfied.  I'll send him
away," said Levin.

"What do you mean!  Are you crazy?" Dolly cried in horror;
"nonsense, Kostya, only think!" she said, laughing.  "You can go
now to Fanny," she said to Masha.  "No, if you wish it, I'll
speak to Stiva.  He'll take him away.  He can say you're
expecting visitors.  Altogether he doesn't fit into the house."

"No, no, I'll do it myself."

"But you'll quarrel with him?"

"Not a bit.  I shall so enjoy it," Levin said, his eyes flashing
with real enjoyment.  "Come, forgive her, Dolly, she won't do it
again," he said of the little sinner, who had not gone to Fanny,
but was standing irresolutely before her mother, waiting and
looking up from under her brows to catch her mother's eye.

The mother glanced at her.  The child broke into sobs, hid her
face on her mother's lap, and Dolly laid her thin, tender hand on
her head.

"And what is there in common between us and him?" thought Levin,
and he went off to look for Veslovsky.

As he passed through the passage he gave orders for the carriage
to be got ready to drive to the station.

"The spring was broken yesterday," said the footman.

"Well, the covered trap, then, and make haste.  Where's the
visitor?"

"The gentleman's gone to his room."

Levin came upon Veslovsky at the moment when the latter, having
unpacked his things from his trunk, and laid out some new songs,
was putting on his gaiters to go out riding.

Whether there was something exceptional in Levin's face, or that
Vassenka was himself conscious that _ce petit brin de cour_ he was
making was out of place in this family, but he was somewhat (as
much as a young man in society can be) disconcerted at Levin's
entrance.

"You ride in gaiters?"

"Yes, it's much cleaner," said Vassenka, putting his fat leg on a
chair, fastening the bottom hook, and smiling with simple-hearted
good humor.

He was undoubtedly a good-natured fellow, and Levin felt sorry
for him and ashamed of himself, as his host, when he saw the shy
look on Vassenka's face.

On the table lay a piece of stick which they had broken together
that morning, trying their strength.  Levin took the fragment in
his hands and began smashing it up, breaking bits off the stick,
not knowing how to begin.

"I wanted...."  He paused, but suddenly, remembering Kitty and
everything that had happened, he said, looking him resolutely in
the face: "I have ordered the horses to be put-to for you."

"How so?" Vassenka began in surprise.  "To drive where?"

"For you to drive to the station," Levin said gloomily.

"Are you going away, or has something happened?"

"It happens that I expect visitors," said Levin, his strong
fingers more and more rapidly breaking off the ends of the split
stick.  "And I'm not expecting visitors, and nothing has
happened, but I beg you to go away.  You can explain my rudeness
as you like."

Vassenka drew himself up.

"I beg you to explain..." he said with dignity, understanding at
last.

"I can't explain," Levin said softly and deliberately, trying to
control the trembling of his jaw; "and you'd better not ask."

And as the split ends were all broken off, Levin clutched the
thick ends in his finger, broke the stick in two, and carefully
caught the end as it fell.

Probably the sight of those nervous fingers, of the muscles he
had proved that morning at gymnastics, of the glittering eyes,
the soft voice, and quivering jaws, convinced Vassenka better
than any words.  He bowed, shrugging his shoulders, and smiling
contemptuously.

"Can I not see Oblonsky?"

The shrug and the smile did not irritate Levin.

"What else was there for him to do?" he thought.

"I'll send him to you at once."

"What madness is this?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said when, after
hearing from his friend that he was being turned out of the
house, he found Levin in the garden, where he was walking about
waiting for his guest's departure.  "_Mais c'est ridicule!_  What
fly has stung you?  _Mais c'est du dernier ridicule!_  What did you
think, if a young man..."

But the place where Levin had been stung was evidently still
sore, for he turned pale again, when Stepan Arkadyevitch would
have enlarged on the reason, and he himself cut him short.

"Please don't go into it!  I can't help it.  I feel ashamed of
how I'm treating you and him.  But it won't be, I imagine, a
great grief to him to go, and his presence was distasteful to me
and to my wife."

"But it's insulting to him!  _Et puis c'est ridicule_."

"And to me it's both insulting and distressing!  And I'm not at
fault in any way, and there's no need for me to suffer."

"Well, this I didn't expect of you!  _On peut être jaloux, mais
à ce point, c'est du dernier ridicule!_"

Levin turned quickly, and walked away from him into the depths of
the avenue, and he went on walking up and down alone.  Soon he
heard the rumble of the trap, and saw from behind the trees how
Vassenka, sitting in the hay (unluckily there was no seat in the
trap) in his Scotch cap, was driven along the avenue, jolting up
and down over the ruts.

"What's this?" Levin thought, when a footman ran out of the house
and stopped the trap.  It was the mechanician, whom Levin had
totally forgotten.  The mechanician, bowing low, said something
to Veslovsky, then clambered into the trap, and they drove off
together.

Stepan Arkadyevitch and the princess were much upset by Levin's
action.  And he himself felt not only in the highest degree
_ridicule_, but also utterly guilty and disgraced.  But remembering
what sufferings he and his wife had been through, when he asked
himself how he should act another time, he answered that he
should do just the same again.

In spite of all this, towards the end of that day, everyone
except the princess, who could not pardon Levin's action, became
extraordinarily lively and good humored, like children after a
punishment or grown-up people after a dreary, ceremonious
reception, so that by the evening Vassenka's dismissal was spoken
of, in the absence of the princess, as though it were some remote
event.  And Dolly, who had inherited her father's gift of
humorous storytelling, made Varenka helpless with laughter as she
related for the third and fourth time, always with fresh humorous
additions, how she had only just put on her new shoes for the
benefit of the visitor, and on going into the drawing room, heard
suddenly the rumble of the trap.  And who should be in the trap
but Vassenka himself, with his Scotch cap, and his songs and his
gaiters, and all, sitting in the hay.

"If only you'd ordered out the carriage!  But no! and then I
hear: 'Stop!'  Oh, I thought they've relented.  I look out, and
behold a fat German being sat down by him and driving away....
And my new shoes all for nothing!..."



Chapter 16


Darya Alexandrovna carried out her intention and went to see
Anna.  She was sorry to annoy her sister and to do anything Levin
disliked.  She quite understood how right the Levins were in not
wishing to have anything to do with Vronsky.  But she felt she
must go and see Anna, and show her that her feelings could not be
changed, in spite of the change in her position.  That she might
be independent of the Levins in this expedition, Darya
Alexandrovna sent to the village to hire horses for the drive;
but Levin learning of it went to her to protest.

"What makes you suppose that I dislike your going?  But, even if
I did dislike it, I should still more dislike your not taking my
horses," he said.  "You never told me that you were going for
certain.  Hiring horses in the village is disagreeable to me,
and, what's of more importance, they'll undertake the job and
never get you there.  I have horses.  And if you don't want to
wound me, you'll take mine."

Darya Alexandrovna had to consent, and on the day fixed Levin had
ready for his sister-in-law a set of four horses and relays,
getting them together from the farm- and saddle-horses--not at
all a smart-looking set, but capable of taking Darya Alexandrovna
the whole distance in a single day.  At that moment, when horses
were wanted for the princess, who was going, and for the midwife,
it was a difficult matter for Levin to make up the number, but
the duties of hospitality would not let him allow Darya
Alexandrovna to hire horses when staying in his house.  Moreover,
he was well aware that the twenty roubles that would be asked for
the journey were a serious matter for her; Darya Alexandrovna's
pecuniary affairs, which were in a very unsatisfactory state,
were taken to heart by the Levins as if they were their own.

Darya Alexandrovna, by Levin's advice, started before daybreak.
The road was good, the carriage comfortable, the horses trotted
along merrily, and on the box, besides the coachman, sat the
counting-house clerk, whom Levin was sending instead of a groom
for greater security.  Darya Alexandrovna dozed and waked up only
on reaching the inn where the horses were to be changed.

After drinking tea at the same well-to-do peasant's with whom
Levin had stayed on the way to Sviazhsky's, and chatting with the
women about their children, and with the old man about Count
Vronsky, whom the latter praised very highly, Darya Alexandrovna,
at ten o'clock, went on again.  At home, looking after her
children, she had no time to think.  So now, after this journey
of four hours, all the thoughts she had suppressed before rushed
swarming into her brain, and she thought over all her life as she
never had before, and from the most different points of view.
Her thoughts seemed strange even to herself.  At first she
thought about the children, about whom she was uneasy, although
the princess and Kitty (she reckoned more upon her) had promised
to look after them.  "If only Masha does not begin her naughty
tricks, if Grisha isn't kicked by a horse, and Lily's stomach
isn't upset again!" she thought.  But these questions of the
present were succeeded by questions of the immediate future.  She
began thinking how she had to get a new flat in Moscow for the
coming winter, to renew the drawing room furniture, and to make
her elder girl a cloak.  Then questions of the more remote future
occurred to her: how she was to place her children in the world.
"The girls are all right," she thought; "but the boys?"

"It's very well that I'm teaching Grisha, but of course that's
only because I am free myself now, I'm not with child.  Stiva,
of course, there's no counting on.  And with the help of
good-natured friends I can bring them up; but if there's another
baby coming?..."  And the thought struck her how untruly it was
said that the curse laid on woman was that in sorrow she should
bring forth children.

"The birth itself, that's nothing; but the months of carrying the
child--that's what's so intolerable," she thought, picturing to
herself her last pregnancy, and the death of the last baby.  And
she recalled the conversation she had just had with the young
woman at the inn.  On being asked whether she had any children,
the handsome young woman had answered cheerfully:

"I had a girl baby, but God set me free; I buried her last Lent."

"Well, did you grieve very much for her?" asked Darya
Alexandrovna.

"Why grieve?  The old man has grandchildren enough as it is.  It
was only a trouble.  No working, nor nothing.  Only a tie."

This answer had struck Darya Alexandrovna as revolting in spite
of the good-natured and pleasing face of the young woman; but now
she could not help recalling these words.  In those cynical words
there was indeed a grain of truth.

"Yes, altogether," thought Darya Alexandrovna, looking back over
her whole existence during those fifteen years of her married
life, "pregnancy, sickness, mental incapacity, indifference to
everything, and most of all--hideousness.  Kitty, young and
pretty as she is, even Kitty has lost her looks; and I when I'm
with child become hideous, I know it.  The birth, the agony, the
hideous agonies, that last moment...then the nursing, the
sleepless nights, the fearful pains...."

Darya Alexandrovna shuddered at the mere recollection of the pain
from sore breasts which she had suffered with almost every child.
"Then the children's illnesses, that everlasting apprehension;
then bringing them up; evil propensities" (she thought of little
Masha's crime among the raspberries), "education, Latin--it's all
so incomprehensible and difficult.  And on the top of it all, the
death of these children."  And there rose again before her
imagination the cruel memory, that always tore her mother's
heart, of the death of her last little baby, who had died of
croup; his funeral, the callous indifference of all at the little
pink coffin, and her own torn heart, and her lonely anguish at
the sight of the pale little brow with its projecting temples,
and the open, wondering little mouth seen in the coffin at the
moment when it was being covered with the little pink lid with a
cross braided on it.

"And all this, what's it for?  What is to come of it all?  That
I'm  wasting my life, never having a moment's peace, either with
child, or nursing a child, forever irritable, peevish, wretched
myself and worrying others, repulsive to my husband, while the
children are growing up unhappy, badly educated, and penniless.
Even now, if it weren't for spending the summer at the Levins',
I don't know how we should be managing to live.  Of course Kostya
and Kitty have so much tact that we don't feel it; but it can't
go on.  They'll have children, they won't be able to keep us;
it's a drag on them as it is.  How is papa, who has hardly
anything left for himself, to help us?  So that I can't even
bring the children up by myself, and may find it hard with the
help of other people, at the cost of humiliation.  Why, even if
we suppose the greatest good luck, that the children don't die,
and I bring them up somehow.  At the very best they'll simply be
decent people.  That's all I can hope for.  And to gain simply
that--what agonies, what toil!...  One's whole life ruined!"
Again she recalled what the young peasant woman had said, and
again she was revolted at the thought; but she could not help
admitting that there was a grain of brutal truth in the words.

"Is it far now, Mihail?" Darya Alexandrovna asked the
counting house clerk, to turn her mind from thoughts that were
frightening her.

"From this village, they say, it's five miles."  The carriage
drove along the village street and onto a bridge.  On the bridge
was a crowd of peasant women with coils of ties for the sheaves
on their shoulders, gaily and noisily chattering.  They stood
still on the bridge, staring inquisitively at the carriage.  All
the faces turned to Darya Alexandrovna looked to her healthy and
happy, making her envious of their enjoyment of life.  "They're
all living, they're all enjoying life," Darya Alexandrovna still
mused when she had passed the peasant women and was driving
uphill again at a trot, seated comfortably on the soft springs of
the old carriage, "while I, let out, as it were from prison, from
the world of worries that fret me to death, am only looking about
me now for an instant.  They all live; those peasant women and my
sister Natalia and Varenka and Anna, whom I am going to see--all,
but not I.

"And they attack Anna.  What for? am I any better?  I have,
anyway, a husband I love--not as I should like to love him, still
I do love him, while Anna never loved hers.  How is she to blame?
She wants to live.  God has put that in our hearts.  Very likely
I should have done the same.  Even to this day I don't feel sure
I did right in listening to her at that terrible time when she
came to me in Moscow.  I ought then to have cast off my husband
and have begun my life fresh.  I might have loved and have been
loved in reality.  And is it any better as it is?  I don't
respect him.  He's necessary to me," she thought about her
husband, "and I put up with him.  Is that any better?  At that
time I could still have been admired, I had beauty left me
still," Darya Alexandrovna pursued her thoughts, and she would
have liked to look at herself in the looking glass.  She had a
traveling looking glass in her handbag, and she wanted to take
it out; but looking at the backs of the coachman and the swaying
counting house clerk, she felt that she would be ashamed if
either of them were to look round, and she did not take out the
glass.

But without looking in the glass, she thought that even now it
was not too late; and she thought of Sergey Ivanovitch, who was
always particularly attentive to her, of Stiva's good-hearted
friend, Turovtsin, who had helped her nurse her children through
the scarlatina, and was in love with her.  And there was someone
else, a quite young man, who--her husband had told her it as a
joke--thought her more beautiful than either of her sisters.  And
the most passionate and impossible romances rose before Darya
Alexandrovna's imagination.  "Anna did quite right, and certainly
I shall never reproach her for it.  She is happy, she makes
another person happy, and she's not broken down as I am, but most
likely just as she always was, bright, clever, open to every
impression," thought Darya Alexandrovna,--and a sly smile curved
her lips, for, as she pondered on Anna's love affair, Darya
Alexandrovna constructed on parallel lines an almost identical
love affair for herself, with an imaginary composite figure, the
ideal man who was in love with her.  She, like Anna, confessed
the whole affair to her husband.  And the amazement and
perplexity of Stepan Arkadyevitch at this avowal made her smile.

In such daydreams she reached the turning of the highroad that
led to Vozdvizhenskoe.



Chapter 17


The coachman pulled up his four horses and looked round to the
right, to a field of rye, where some peasants were sitting on a
cart.  The counting house clerk was just going to jump down, but
on second thoughts he shouted peremptorily to the peasants
instead, and beckoned to them to come up.  The wind, that seemed
to blow as they drove, dropped when the carriage stood still;
gadflies settled on the steaming horses that angrily shook them
off.  The metallic clank of a whetstone against a scythe, that
came to them from the cart, ceased.  One of the peasants got up
and came towards the carriage.

"Well, you are slow!" the counting house clerk shouted angrily to
the peasant who was stepping slowly with his bare feet over the
ruts of the rough dry road.  "Come along, do!"

A curly-headed old man with a bit of bast tied round his hair,
and his bent back dark with perspiration, came towards the
carriage, quickening his steps, and took hold of the mud-guard
with his sunburnt hand.

"Vozdvizhenskoe, the manor house? the count's?" he repeated; "go
on to the end of this track.  Then turn to the left.  Straight
along the avenue and you'll come right upon it.  But whom do you
want?  The count himself?"

"Well, are they at home, my good man?" Darya Alexandrovna said
vaguely, not knowing how to ask about Anna, even of this peasant.

"At home for sure," said the peasant, shifting from one bare foot
to the other, and leaving a distinct print of five toes and a
heel in the dust.  "Sure to be at home," he repeated, evidently
eager to talk.  "Only yesterday visitors arrived.  There's a
sight of visitors come.  What do you want?"  He turned round and
called to a lad, who was shouting something to him from the cart.
"Oh!  They all rode by here not long since, to look at a reaping
machine.  They'll be home by now.  And who will you be belonging
to?..."

"We've come a long way," said the coachman, climbing onto the
box.  "So it's not far?"

"I tell you, it's just here.  As soon as you get out..." he said,
keeping hold all the while of the carriage.

A healthy-looking, broad-shouldered young fellow came up too.

"What, is it laborers they want for the harvest?" he asked.

"I don't know, my boy."

"So you keep to the left, and you'll come right on it," said the
peasant, unmistakably loth to let the travelers go, and eager to
converse.

The coachman started the horses, but they were only just turning
off when the peasant shouted: "Stop!  Hi, friend!  Stop!" called
the two voices.  The coachman stopped.

"They're coming!  They're yonder!" shouted the peasant.  "See
what a turn-out!" he said, pointing to four persons on horseback,
and two in a _char-à-banc_, coming along the road.

They were Vronsky with a jockey, Veslovsky and Anna on horseback,
and Princess Varvara and Sviazhsky in the _char-à-banc_.  They had
gone out to look at the working of a new reaping machine.

When the carriage stopped, the party on horseback were coming at
a walking pace.  Anna was in front beside Veslovsky.  Anna,
quietly walking her horse, a sturdy English cob with cropped mane
and short tail, her beautiful head with her black hair straying
loose under her high hat, her full shoulders, her slender waist
in her black riding habit, and all the ease and grace of her
deportment, impressed Dolly.

For the first minute it seemed to her unsuitable for Anna to be
on horseback.  The conception of riding on horseback for a lady
was, in Darya Alexandrovna's mind, associated with ideas of
youthful flirtation and frivolity, which, in her opinion, was
unbecoming in Anna's position.  But when she had scrutinized her,
seeing her closer, she was at once reconciled to her riding.  In
spite of her elegance, everything was so simple, quiet, and
dignified in the attitude, the dress and the movements of Anna,
that nothing could have been more natural.

Beside Anna, on a hot-looking gray cavalry horse, was Vassenka
Veslovsky in his Scotch cap with floating ribbons, his stout
legs stretched out in front, obviously pleased with his own
appearance.  Darya Alexandrovna could not suppress a good-humored
smile as she recognized him.  Behind rode Vronsky on a dark bay
mare, obviously heated from galloping.  He was holding her in,
pulling at the reins.

After him rode a little man in the dress of a jockey.  Sviazhsky
and Princess Varvara in a new _char-à-banc_ with a big, raven-black
trotting horse, overtook the party on horseback.

Anna's face suddenly beamed with a joyful smile at the instant
when, in the little figure huddled in a corner of the old
carriage, she recognized Dolly.  She uttered a cry, started in
the saddle, and set her horse into a gallop.  On reaching the
carriage she jumped off without assistance, and holding up her
riding habit, she ran up to greet Dolly.

"I thought it was you and dared not think it.  How delightful!
You can't fancy how glad I am!" she said, at one moment pressing
her face against Dolly and kissing her, and at the next holding
her off and examining her with a smile.

"Here's a delightful surprise, Alexey!" she said, looking round
at Vronsky, who had dismounted, and was walking towards them.

Vronsky, taking off his tall gray hat, went up to Dolly.

"You wouldn't believe how glad we are to see you," he said,
giving peculiar significance to the words, and showing his strong
white teeth in a smile.

Vassenka Veslovsky, without getting off his horse, took off his
cap and greeted the visitor by gleefully waving the ribbons over
his head.

"That's Princess Varvara," Anna said in reply to a glance of
inquiry from Dolly as the _char-à-banc_ drove up.

"Ah!" said Darya Alexandrovna, and unconsciously her face
betrayed her dissatisfaction.

Princess Varvara was her husband's aunt, and she had long known
her, and did not respect her.  She knew that Princess Varvara had
passed her whole life toadying on her rich relations, but that
she should now be sponging on Vronsky, a man who was nothing to
her, mortified Dolly on account of her kinship with her husband.
Anna noticed Dolly's expression, and was disconcerted by it.  She
blushed, dropped her riding habit, and stumbled over it.

Darya Alexandrovna went up to the _char-à-banc_ and coldly greeted
Princess Varvara.  Sviazhsky too she knew.  He inquired how his
queer friend with the young wife was, and running his eyes over
the ill-matched horses and the carriage with its patched
mud-guards, proposed to the ladies that they should get into the
_char-à-banc_.

"And I'll get into this vehicle," he said.  "The horse is quiet,
and the princess drives capitally."

"No, stay as you were," said Anna, coming up, "and we'll go in
the carriage," and taking Dolly's arm, she drew her away.

Darya Alexandrovna's eyes were fairly dazzled by the elegant
carriage of a pattern she had never seen before, the splendid
horses, and the elegant and gorgeous people surrounding her.  But
what struck her most of all was the change that had taken place
in Anna, whom she knew so well and loved.  Any other woman, a
less close observer, not knowing Anna before, or not having
thought as Darya Alexandrovna had been thinking on the road,
would not have noticed anything special in Anna.  But now Dolly
was struck by that temporary beauty, which is only found in
women during the moments of love, and which she saw now in Anna's
face.  Everything in her face, the clearly marked dimples in her
cheeks and chin, the line of her lips, the smile which, as it
were, fluttered about her face, the brilliance of her eyes, the
grace and rapidity of her movements, the fulness of the notes of
her voice, even the manner in which, with a sort of angry
friendliness, she answered Veslovsky when he asked permission to
get on her cob, so as to teach it to gallop with the right leg
foremost--it was all peculiarly fascinating, and it seemed as if
she were herself aware of it, and rejoicing in it.

When both the women were seated in the carriage, a sudden
embarrassment came over both of them.  Anna was disconcerted by
the intent look of inquiry Dolly fixed upon her.  Dolly was
embarrassed because after Sviazhsky's phrase about "this
vehicle," she could not help feeling ashamed of the dirty old
carriage in which Anna was sitting with her.  The coachman Philip
and the counting house clerk were experiencing the same
sensation.  The counting house clerk, to conceal his confusion,
busied himself settling the ladies, but Philip the coachman
became sullen, and was bracing himself not to be overawed in
future by this external superiority.  He smiled ironically,
looking at the raven horse, and was already deciding in his own
mind that this smart trotter in the _char-à-banc_ was only good for
_promenade_, and wouldn't do thirty miles straight off in the heat.

The peasants had all got up from the cart and were inquisitively
and mirthfully staring at the meeting of the friends, making
their comments on it.

"They're pleased, too; haven't seen each other for a long while,"
said the curly-headed old man with the bast round his hair.

"I say, Uncle Gerasim, if we could take that raven horse now, to
cart the corn, that 'ud be quick work!"

"Look-ee!  Is that a woman in breeches?" said one of them,
pointing to Vassenka Veslovsky sitting in a side saddle.

"Nay, a man! See how smartly he's going it!"

"Eh, lads! seems we're not going to sleep, then?"

"What chance of sleep today!" said the old man, with a sidelong
look at the sun.  "Midday's past, look-ee!  Get your hooks, and
come along!"



Chapter 18


Anna looked at Dolly's thin, care-worn face, with its wrinkles
filled with dust from the road, and she was on the point of
saying what she was thinking, that is, that Dolly had got
thinner.  But, conscious that she herself had grown handsomer,
and that Dolly's eyes were telling her so, she sighed and began
to speak about herself.

"You are looking at me," she said, "and wondering how I can be
happy in my position?  Well! it's shameful to confess, but I...
I'm inexcusably happy.  Something magical has happened to me,
like a dream, when you're frightened, panic-stricken, and all of
a sudden you wake up and all the horrors are no more.  I have
waked up.  I have lived through the misery, the dread, and now
for a long while past, especially since we've been here, I've
been so happy!..." she said, with a timid smile of inquiry
looking at Dolly.

"How glad I am!" said Dolly smiling, involuntarily speaking more
coldly than she wanted to.  "I'm very glad for you.  Why haven't
you written to me?"

"Why?...  Because I hadn't the courage....  You forget my
position..."

"To me?  Hadn't the courage?  If you knew how I...I look at..."

Darya Alexandrovna wanted to express her thoughts of the morning,
but for some reason it seemed to her now out of place to do so.

"But of that we'll talk later.  What's this, what are all these
buildings?" she asked, wanting to change the conversation and
pointing to the red and green roofs that came into view behind
the green hedges of acacia and lilac.  "Quite a little town."

But Anna did not answer.

"No, no!  How do you look at my position, what do you think of
it?" she asked.

"I consider..." Darya Alexandrovna was beginning, but at that
instant Vassenka Veslovsky, having brought the cob to gallop with
the right leg foremost, galloped past them, bumping heavily up
and down in his short jacket on the chamois leather of the
side saddle.  "He's doing it, Anna Arkadyevna!" he shouted.

Anna did not even glance at him; but again it seemed to Darya
Alexandrovna out of place to enter upon such a long conversation
in the carriage, and so she cut short her thought.

"I don't think anything," she said, "but I always loved you, and
if one loves anyone, one loves the whole person, just as they
are and not as one would like them to be...."

Anna, taking her eyes off her friend's face and dropping her
eyelids (this was a new habit Dolly had not seen in her before),
pondered, trying to penetrate the full significance of the words.
And obviously interpreting them as she would have wished, she
glanced at Dolly.

"If you had any sins," she said, "they would all be forgiven you
for your coming to see me and these words."

And Dolly saw that tears stood in her eyes.  She pressed Anna's
hand in silence.

"Well, what are these buildings?  How many there are of them!"
After a moment's silence she repeated her question.

"These are the servants' houses, barns, and stables," answered
Anna.  "And there the park begins.  It had all gone to ruin, but
Alexey had everything renewed.  He is very fond of this place,
and, what I never expected, he has become intensely interested in
looking after it.  But his is such a rich nature!  Whatever he
takes up, he does splendidly.  So far from being bored by it, he
works with passionate interest.  He--with his temperament as I
know it--he has become careful and businesslike, a first-rate
manager, he positively reckons every penny in his management of
the land.  But only in that.  When it's a question of tens of
thousands, he doesn't think of money."  She spoke with that
gleefully sly smile with which women often talk of the secret
characteristics only known to them--of those they love.  "Do you
see that big building? that's the new hospital.  I believe it
will cost over a hundred thousand; that's his hobby just now.
And do you know how it all came about?  The peasants asked him
for some meadowland, I think it was, at a cheaper rate, and he
refused, and I accused him of being miserly.  Of course it was
not really because of that, but everything together, he began
this hospital to prove, do you see, that he was not miserly about
money.  _C'est une petitesse_, if you like, but I love him all the
more for it.  And now you'll see the house in a moment.  It was
his grandfather's house, and he has had nothing changed outside."

"How beautiful!" said Dolly, looking with involuntary admiration
at the handsome house with columns, standing out among the
different-colored greens of the old trees in the garden.

"Isn't it fine?  And from the house, from the top, the view is
wonderful."

They drove into a courtyard strewn with gravel and bright with
flowers, in which two laborers were at work putting an edging of
stones round the light mould of a flower bed, and drew up in a
covered entry.

"Ah, they're here already!" said Anna, looking at the saddle
horses, which were just being led away from the steps.  "It is a
nice horse, isn't it?  It's my cob; my favorite.  Lead him here
and bring me some sugar.  Where is the count?" she inquired of
two smart footmen who darted out.  "Ah, there he is!" she said,
seeing Vronsky coming to meet her with Veslovsky.

"Where are you going to put the princess?" said Vronsky in
French, addressing Anna, and without waiting for a reply, he once
more greeted Darya Alexandrovna, and this time he kissed her
hand.  "I think the big balcony room."

"Oh, no, that's too far off!  Better in the corner room, we shall
see each other more.  Come, let's go up," said Anna, as she gave
her favorite horse the sugar the footman had brought her.

"_Et vous oubliez votre devoir_," she said to Veslovsky, who came
out too on the steps.

"_Pardon, j'en ai tout plein les poches_," he answered, smiling,
putting his fingers in his waistcoat pocket.

"_Mais vous venez trop tard_," she said, rubbing her handkerchief
on her hand, which the horse had made wet in taking the sugar.

Anna turned to Dolly.  "You can stay some time?  For one day
only?  That's impossible!"

"I promised to be back, and the children..." said Dolly, feeling
embarrassed both because she had to get her bag out of the
carriage, and because she knew her face must be covered with
dust.

"No, Dolly, darling!...  Well, we'll see.  Come along, come
along!" and Anna led Dolly to her room.

That room was not the smart guest chamber Vronsky had suggested,
but the one of which Anna had said that Dolly would excuse it.
And this room, for which excuse was needed, was more full of
luxury than any in which Dolly had ever stayed, a luxury that
reminded her of the best hotels abroad.

"Well, darling, how happy I am!" Anna said, sitting down in her
riding habit for a moment beside Dolly.  "Tell me about all of
you.  Stiva I had only a glimpse of, and he cannot tell one
about the children.  How is my favorite, Tanya?  Quite a big
girl, I expect?"

"Yes, she's very tall," Darya Alexandrovna answered shortly,
surprised herself that she should respond so coolly about her
children.  "We are having a delightful stay at the Levins'," she
added.

"Oh, if I had known," said Anna, "that you do not despise me!...
You might have all come to us.  Stiva's an old friend and a great
friend of Alexey's, you know," she added, and suddenly she
blushed.

"Yes, but we are all..." Dolly answered in confusion.

"But in my delight I'm talking nonsense.  The one thing, darling,
is that I am so glad to have you!" said Anna, kissing her again.
"You haven't told me yet how and what you think about me, and I
keep wanting to know.  But I'm glad you will see me as I am.
The chief thing I shouldn't like would be for people to imagine I
want to prove anything.  I don't want to prove anything; I
merely want to live, to do no one harm but myself.  I have the
right to do that, haven't I?  But it is a big subject, and we'll
talk over everything properly later.  Now I'll go and dress and
send a maid to you."



Chapter 19


Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna, with a good housewife's eye,
scanned her room.  All she had seen in entering the house and
walking through it, and all she saw now in her room, gave her an
impression of wealth and sumptuousness and of that modern
European luxury of which she had only read in English novels, but
had never seen in Russia and in the country.  Everything was new
from the new French hangings on the walls to the carpet which
covered the whole floor.  The bed had a spring mattress, and a
special sort of bolster and silk pillowcases on the little
pillows.  The marble washstand, the dressing table, the little
sofa, the tables, the bronze clock on the chimney piece, the
window curtains, and the _portières_ were all new and expensive.

The smart maid, who came in to offer her services, with her hair
done up high, and a gown more fashionable than Dolly's, was as
new and expensive as the whole room.  Darya Alexandrovna liked
her neatness, her deferential and obliging manners, but she felt
ill at ease with her.  She felt ashamed of her seeing the patched
dressing jacket that had unluckily been packed by mistake for
her.  She was ashamed of the very patches and darned places of
which she had been so proud at home.  At home it had been so
clear that for six dressing jackets there would be needed
twenty-four yards of nainsook at sixteen pence the yard, which
was a matter of thirty shillings besides the cutting-out and
making, and these thirty shillings had been saved.  But before
the maid she felt, if not exactly ashamed, at least
uncomfortable.

Darya Alexandrovna had a great sense of relief when Annushka,
whom she had known for years, walked in.  The smart maid was sent
for to go to her mistress, and Annushka remained with Darya
Alexandrovna.

Annushka was obviously much pleased at that lady's arrival, and
began to chatter away without a pause.  Dolly observed that she
was longing to express her opinion in regard to her mistress's
position, especially as to the love and devotion of the count to
Anna Arkadyevna, but Dolly carefully interrupted her whenever she
began to speak about this.

"I grew up with Anna Arkadyevna; my lady's dearer to me than
anything.  Well, it's not for us to judge.  And, to be sure,
there seems so much love..."

"Kindly pour out the water for me to wash now, please," Darya
Alexandrovna cut her short.

"Certainly.  We've two women kept specially for washing small
things, but most of the linen's done by machinery.  The count
goes into everything himself.  Ah, what a husband!..."

Dolly was glad when Anna came in, and by her entrance put a stop
to Annushka's gossip.

Anna had put on a very simple batiste gown.  Dolly scrutinized
that simple gown attentively.  She knew what it meant, and the
price at which such simplicity was obtained.

"An old friend," said Anna of Annushka.

Anna was not embarrassed now.  She was perfectly composed and at
ease.  Dolly saw that she had now completely recovered from the
impression her arrival had made on her, and had assumed that
superficial, careless tone which, as it were, closed the door on
that compartment in which her deeper feelings and ideas were
kept.

"Well, Anna, and how is your little girl?" asked Dolly.

"Annie?"  (This was what she called her little daughter Anna.)
"Very well.  She has got on wonderfully.  Would you like to see
her?  Come, I'll show her to you.  We had a terrible bother," she
began telling her, "over nurses.  We had an Italian wet-nurse.  A
good creature, but so stupid!  We wanted to get rid of her, but
the baby is so used to her that we've gone on keeping her still."

"But how have you managed?..."  Dolly was beginning a question
as to what name the little girl would have; but noticing a sudden
frown on Anna's face, she changed the drift of her question.

"How did you manage? have you weaned her yet?"

But Anna had understood.

"You didn't mean to ask that?  You meant to ask about her
surname.  Yes?  That worries Alexey.  She has no name--that is,
she's a Karenina," said Anna, dropping her eyelids till nothing
could be seen but the eyelashes meeting.  "But we'll talk about
all that later," her face suddenly brightening.  "Come, I'll show
you her.  _Elle est tres gentille_.  She crawls now."

In the nursery the luxury which had impressed Dolly in the whole
house struck her still more.  There were little go-carts ordered
from England, and appliances for learning to walk, and a sofa
after the fashion of a billiard table, purposely constructed for
crawling, and swings and baths, all of special pattern, and
modern.  They were all English, solid, and of good make, and
obviously very expensive.  The room was large, and very light and
lofty.

When they went in, the baby, with nothing on but her little smock,
was sitting in a little elbow chair at the table, having her
dinner of broth, which she was spilling all over her little chest.
The baby was being fed, and the Russian nursery maid was
evidently sharing her meal.  Neither the wet-nurse nor the
head nurse were there; they were in the next room, from which
came the sound of their conversation in the queer French which
was their only means of communication.

Hearing Anna's voice, a smart, tall, English nurse with a
disagreeable face and a dissolute expression walked in at the
door, hurriedly shaking her fair curls, and immediately began to
defend herself though Anna had not found fault with her.  At
every word Anna said, the English nurse said hurriedly several
times, "Yes, my lady."

The rosy baby with her black eyebrows and hair, her sturdy red
little body with tight goose-flesh skin, delighted Darya
Alexandrovna in spite of the cross expression with which she
stared at the stranger.  She positively envied the baby's healthy
appearance.  She was delighted, too, at the baby's crawling.  Not
one of her own children had crawled like that.  When the baby was
put on the carpet and its little dress tucked up behind, it was
wonderfully charming.  Looking round like some little wild animal
at the grown-up big people with her bright black eyes, she
smiled, unmistakably pleased at their admiring her, and holding
her legs sideways, she pressed vigorously on her arms, and
rapidly drew her whole back up after, and then made another step
forward with her little arms.

But the whole atmosphere of the nursery, and especially the
English nurse, Darya Alexandrovna did not like at all.  It was
only on the supposition that no good nurse would have entered so
irregular a household as Anna's that Darya Alexandrovna could
explain to herself how Anna with her insight into people could
take such an unprepossessing, disreputable-looking woman as nurse
to her child.

Besides, from a few words that were dropped, Darya Alexandrovna
saw at once that Anna, the two nurses, and the child had no
common existence, and that the mother's visit was something
exceptional.  Anna wanted to get the baby her plaything, and
could not find it.

Most amazing of all was the fact that on being asked how many
teeth the baby had, Anna answered wrong, and knew nothing about
the two last teeth.

"I sometimes feel sorry I'm so superfluous here," said Anna,
going out of the nursery and holding up her skirt so as to escape
the plaything standing in the doorway.  "It was very different
with my first child."

"I expected it to be the other way," said Darya Alexandrovna
shyly.

"Oh, no! By the way, do you know I saw Seryozha?" said Anna,
screwing up her eyes, as though looking at something far away.
"But we'll talk about that later.  You wouldn't believe it, I'm
like a hungry beggar woman when a full dinner is set before her,
and she does not know what to begin on first.  The dinner is you,
and the talks I have before me with you, which I could never have
with anyone else; and I don't know which subject to begin upon
first.  _Mais je ne vous ferai grace de rien_.  I must have
everything out with you."

"Oh, I ought to give you a sketch of the company you will meet
with us," she went on.  "I'll begin with the ladies.  Princess
Varvara--you know her, and I know your opinion and Stiva's about
her.  Stiva says the whole aim of her existence is to prove her
superiority over Auntie Katerina Pavlovna: that's all true; but
she's a good-natured woman, and I am so grateful to her.  In
Petersburg there was a moment when a chaperon was absolutely
essential for me.  Then she turned up.  But really she is good-
natured.  She did a great deal to alleviate my position.  I see
you don't understand all the difficulty of my position...there in
Petersburg," she added.  "Here I'm perfectly at ease and happy.
Well, of that later on, though.  Then Sviazhsky--he's the marshal
of the district, and he's a very good sort of a man, but he wants
to get something out of Alexey.  You understand, with his
property, now that we are settled in the country, Alexey can
exercise great influence.  Then there's Tushkevitch--you have
seen him, you know--Betsy's admirer.  Now he's been thrown over
and he's come to see us.  As Alexey says, he's one of those
people who are very pleasant if one accepts them for what they
try to appear to be, _et puis il est comme il faut_, as Princess
Varvara says.  Then Veslovsky...you know him.  A very nice boy,"
she said, and a sly smile curved her lips.  "What's this wild
story about him and the Levins?  Veslovsky told Alexey about it,
and we don't believe it.  _Il est très gentil et naïf_," she said
again with the same smile.  "Men need occupation, and Alexey
needs a circle, so I value all these people.  We have to have the
house lively and gay, so that Alexey may not long for any
novelty.  Then you'll see the steward--a German, a very good
fellow, and he understands his work.  Alexey has a very high
opinion of him.  Then the doctor, a young man, not quite a
Nihilist perhaps, but you know, eats with his knife...but a very
good doctor.  Then the architect....  _Une petite cour!_"



Chapter 20


"Here's Dolly for you, princess, you were so anxious to see her,"
said Anna, coming out with Darya Alexandrovna onto the stone
terrace where Princess Varvara was sitting in the shade at an
embroidery frame, working at a cover for Count Alexey
Kirillovitch's easy chair.  "She says she doesn't want anything
before dinner, but please order some lunch for her, and I'll go
and look for Alexey and bring them all in."

Princess Varvara gave Dolly a cordial and rather patronizing
reception, and began at once explaining to her that she was
living with Anna because she had always cared more for her than
her sister Katerina Pavlovna, the aunt that had brought Anna up,
and that now, when every one had abandoned Anna, she thought it
her duty to help her in this most difficult period of transition.

"Her husband will give her a divorce, and then I shall go back to
my solitude; but now I can be of use, and I am doing my duty,
however difficult it may be for me--not like some other people.
And how sweet it is of you, how right of you to have come!  They
live like the best of married couples; it's for God to judge
them, not for us.  And didn't Biryuzovsky and Madame
Avenieva...and Sam Nikandrov, and Vassiliev and Madame Mamonova,
and Liza Neptunova...  Did no one say anything about them?  And
it has ended by their being received by everyone.  And then,
_c'est un intérieur si joli, si comme il faut.  Tout-à-fait à
l'anglaise.  On se réunit le matin au breakfast, et puis on se
sépare._  Everyone does as he pleases till dinnertime.  Dinner at
seven o'clock.  Stiva did very rightly to send you.  He needs
their support.  You know that through his mother and brother he
can do anything.  And then they do so much good.  He didn't tell
you about his hospital?  _Ce sera admirable_--everything from
Paris."

Their conversation was interrupted by Anna, who had found the men
of the party in the billiard room, and returned with them to the
terrace.  There was still a long time before the dinner-hour, it
was exquisite weather, and so several different methods of
spending the next two hours were proposed.  There were very many
methods of passing the time at Vozdvizhenskoe, and these were all
unlike those in use at Pokrovskoe.

"_Une partie de lawn-tennis,_" Veslovsky proposed, with his
handsome smile.  "We'll be partners again, Anna Arkadyevna."

"No, it's too hot; better stroll about the garden and have a row
in the boat, show Darya Alexandrovna the river banks." Vronsky
proposed.

"I agree to anything," said Sviazhsky.

"I imagine that what Dolly would like best would be a stroll--
wouldn't you?  And then the boat, perhaps," said Anna.

So it was decided.  Veslovsky and Tushkevitch went off to the
bathing place, promising to get the boat ready and to wait there
for them.

They walked along the path in two couples, Anna with Sviazhsky,
and Dolly with Vronsky.  Dolly was a little embarrassed and
anxious in the new surroundings in which she found herself.
Abstractly, theoretically, she did not merely justify, she
positively approved of Anna's conduct.  As is indeed not
unfrequent with women of unimpeachable virtue, weary of the
monotony of respectable existence, at a distance she not only
excused illicit love, she positively envied it.  Besides, she
loved Anna with all her heart.  But seeing Anna in actual life
among these strangers, with this fashionable tone that was so new
to Darya Alexandrovna, she felt ill at ease.  What she disliked
particularly was seeing Princess Varvara ready to overlook
everything for the sake of the comforts she enjoyed.

As a general principle, abstractly, Dolly approved of Anna's
action; but to see the man for whose sake her action had been
taken was disagreeable to her.  Moreover, she had never liked
Vronsky.  She thought him very proud, and saw nothing in him of
which he could be proud except his wealth.  But against her own
will, here in his own house, he overawed her more than ever, and
she could not be at ease with him.  She felt with him the same
feeling she had had with the maid about her dressing jacket.
Just as with the maid she had felt not exactly ashamed, but
embarrassed at her darns, so she felt with him not exactly
ashamed, but embarrassed at herself.

Dolly was ill at ease, and tried to find a subject of
conversation.  Even though she supposed that, through his pride,
praise of his house and garden would be sure to be disagreeable
to him, she did all the same tell him how much she liked his
house.

"Yes, it's a very fine building, and in the good old-fashioned
style," he said.

"I like so much the court in front of the steps.  Was that
always so?"

"Oh, no!" he said, and his face beamed with pleasure.  "If you
could only have seen that court last spring!"

And he began, at first rather diffidently, but more and more
carried away by the subject as he went on, to draw her attention
to the various details of the decoration of his house and garden.
It was evident that, having devoted a great deal of trouble to
improve and beautify his home, Vronsky felt a need to show off
the improvements to a new person, and was genuinely delighted at
Darya Alexandrovna's praise.

"If you would care to look at the hospital, and are not tired,
indeed, it's not far.  Shall we go?" he said, glancing into her
face to convince himself that she was not bored.  "Are you
coming, Anna?" he turned to her.

"We will come, won't we?" she said, addressing Sviazhsky.  "_Mais
il ne faut pas laisser le pauvre Veslovsky et Tushkevitch se
morfondre là dans le bateau._  We must send and tell them."

"Yes, this is a monument he is setting up here," said Anna,
turning to Dolly with that sly smile of comprehension with which
she had previously talked about the hospital.

"Oh, it's a work of real importance!" said Sviazhsky.  But to
show he was not trying to ingratiate himself with Vronsky, he
promptly added some slightly critical remarks.

"I wonder, though, count," he said, "that while you do so much
for the health of the peasants, you take so little interest in
the schools."

"_C'est devenu tellement commun les écoles,_" said Vronsky.  "You
understand it's not on that account, but it just happens so, my
interest has been diverted elsewhere.  This way then to the
hospital," he said to Darya Alexandrovna, pointing to a turning
out of the avenue.

The ladies put up their parasols and turned into the side path.
After going down several turnings, and going through a little
gate, Darya Alexandrovna saw standing on rising ground before her
a large pretentious-looking red building, almost finished.  The
iron roof, which was not yet painted, shone with dazzling
brightness in the sunshine.  Beside the finished building another
had been begun, surrounded by scaffolding.  Workmen in aprons,
standing on scaffolds, were laying bricks, pouring mortar out of
vats, and smoothing it with trowels.

"How quickly work gets done with you!" said Sviazhsky.  "When I
was here last time the roof was not on."

"By the autumn it will all be ready.  Inside almost everything is
done," said Anna.

"And what's this new building?"

"That's the house for the doctor and the dispensary," answered
Vronsky, seeing the architect in a short jacket coming towards
him; and excusing himself to the ladies, he went to meet him.

Going round a hole where the workmen were slaking lime, he stood
still with the architect and began talking rather warmly.

"The front is still too low," he said to Anna, who had asked what
was the matter.

"I said the foundation ought to be raised," said Anna.

"Yes, of course it would have been much better, Anna Arkadyevna,"
said the architect, "but now it's too late."

"Yes, I take a great interest in it," Anna answered Sviazhsky,
who was expressing his surprise at her knowledge of architecture.
"This new building ought to have been in harmony with the
hospital.  It was an afterthought, and was begun without a plan."

Vronsky, having finished his talk with the architect, joined the
ladies, and led them inside the hospital.

Although they were still at work on the cornices outside and were
painting on the ground floor, upstairs almost all the rooms were
finished.  Going up the broad cast-iron staircase to the landing,
they walked into the first large room.  The walls were stuccoed
to look like marble, the huge plate-glass windows were already
in, only the parquet floor was not yet finished, and the
carpenters, who were planing a block of it, left their work,
taking off the bands that fastened their hair, to greet the
gentry.

"This is the reception room," said Vronsky.  "Here there will be
a desk, tables, and benches, and nothing more."

"This way; let us go in here.  Don't go near the window," said
Anna, trying the paint to see if it were dry.  "Alexey, the
paint's dry already," she added.

From the reception room they went into the corridor.  Here
Vronsky showed them the mechanism for ventilation on a novel
system.  Then he showed them marble baths, and beds with
extraordinary springs.  Then he showed them the wards one after
another, the storeroom, the linen room, then the heating stove
of a new pattern, then the trolleys, which would make no noise as
they carried everything needed along the corridors, and many
other things.  Sviazhsky, as a connoisseur in the latest
mechanical improvements, appreciated everything fully.  Dolly
simply wondered at all she had not seen before, and, anxious to
understand it all, made minute inquiries about everything, which
gave Vronsky great satisfaction.

"Yes, I imagine that this will be the solitary example of a
properly fitted hospital in Russia," said Sviazhsky.

"And won't you have a lying-in ward?" asked Dolly.  "That's so
much needed in the country.  I have often..."

In spite of his usual courtesy, Vronsky interrupted her.

"This is not a lying-in home, but a hospital for the sick, and is
intended for all diseases, except infectious complaints," he
said.  "Ah! look at this," and he rolled up to Darya Alexandrovna
an invalid chair that had just been ordered for the
convalescents.  "Look."  He sat down in the chair and began
moving it.  "The patient can't walk--still too weak, perhaps, or
something wrong with his legs, but he must have air, and he
moves, rolls himself along...."

Darya Alexandrovna was interested by everything.  She liked
everything very much, but most of all she liked Vronsky himself
with his natural, simple-hearted eagerness.  "Yes, he's a very
nice, good man," she thought several times, not hearing what he
said, but looking at him and penetrating into his expression,
while she mentally put herself in Anna's place.  She liked him so
much just now with his eager interest that she saw how Anna could
be in love with him.



Chapter 21


"No, I think the princess is tired, and horses don't interest
her," Vronsky said to Anna, who wanted to go on to the stables,
where Sviazhsky wished to see the new stallion.  "You go on,
while I escort the princess home, and we'll have a little talk,"
he said, "if you would like that?" he added, turning to her.

"I know nothing about horses, and I shall be delighted,"
answered Darya Alexandrovna, rather astonished.

She saw by Vronsky's face that he wanted something from her.  She
was not mistaken.  As soon as they had passed through the little
gate back into the garden, he looked in the direction Anna had
taken, and having made sure that she could neither hear nor see
them, he began:

"You guess that I have something I want to say to you," he said,
looking at her with laughing eyes.  "I am not wrong in believing
you to be a friend of Anna's."  He took off his hat, and taking
out his handkerchief, wiped his head, which was growing bald.

Darya Alexandrovna made no answer, and merely stared at him with
dismay.  When she was left alone with him, she suddenly felt
afraid; his laughing eyes and stern expression scared her.

The most diverse suppositions as to what he was about to speak of
to her flashed into her brain.  "He is going to beg me to come to
stay with them with the children, and I shall have to refuse; or
to create a set that will receive Anna in Moscow....  Or isn't it
Vassenka Veslovsky and his relations with Anna?  Or perhaps about
Kitty, that he feels he was to blame?"  All her conjectures were
unpleasant, but she did not guess what he really wanted to talk
about to her.

"You have so much influence with Anna, she is so fond of you," he
said; "do help me."

Darya Alexandrovna looked with timid inquiry into his energetic
face, which under the lime-trees was continually being lighted up
in patches by the sunshine, and then passing into complete shadow
again.  She waited for him to say more, but he walked in silence
beside her, scratching with his cane in the gravel.

"You have come to see us, you, the only woman of Anna's former
friends--I don't count Princess Varvara--but I know that you have
done this not because you regard our position as normal, but
because, understanding all the difficulty of the position, you
still love her and want to be a help to her.  Have I understood
you rightly?" he asked, looking round at her.

"Oh, yes," answered Darya Alexandrovna, putting down her
sunshade, "but..."

"No," he broke in, and unconsciously, oblivious of the awkward
position into which he was putting his companion, he stopped
abruptly, so that she had to stop short too.  "No one feels more
deeply and intensely than I do all the difficulty of Anna's
position; and that you may well understand, if you do me the
honor of supposing I have any heart.  I am to blame for that
position, and that is why I feel it."

"I understand," said Darya Alexandrovna, involuntarily admiring
the sincerity and firmness with which he said this.  "But just
because you feel yourself responsible, you exaggerate it, I am
afraid," she said.  "Her position in the world is difficult, I
can well understand."

"In the world it is hell!" he brought out quickly, frowning
darkly.  "You can't imagine moral sufferings greater than what
she went through in Petersburg in that fortnight...and I beg you
to believe it."

"Yes, but here, so long as neither Anna...nor you miss
society..."

"Society!" he said contemptuously, "how could I miss society?"

"So far--and it may be so always--you are happy and at peace.  I
see in Anna that she is happy, perfectly happy, she has had time
to tell me so much already," said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling;
and involuntarily, as she said this, at the same moment a doubt
entered her mind whether Anna really were happy.

But Vronsky, it appeared, had no doubts on that score.

"Yes, yes," he said, "I know that she has revived after all her
sufferings; she is happy.  She is happy in the present.  But
I?...  I am afraid of what is before us...I beg your pardon, you
would like to walk on?"

"No, I don't mind."

"Well, then, let us sit here."

Darya Alexandrovna sat down on a garden seat in a corner of the
avenue.  He stood up facing her.

"I see that she is happy," he repeated, and the doubt whether she
were happy sank more deeply into Darya Alexandrovna's mind.  "But
can it last?  Whether we have acted rightly or wrongly is another
question, but the die is cast," he said, passing from Russian to
French, "and we are bound together for life.  We are united by
all the ties of love that we hold most sacred.  We have a child,
we may have other children.  But the law and all the conditions
of our position are such that thousands of complications arise
which she does not see and does not want to see.  And that one
can well understand.  But I can't help seeing them.  My daughter
is by law not my daughter, but Karenin's.  I cannot bear this
falsity!" he said, with a vigorous gesture of refusal, and he
looked with gloomy inquiry towards Darya Alexandrovna.

She made no answer, but simply gazed at him.  He went on:

"One day a son may be born, my son, and he will be legally a
Karenin; he will not be the heir of my name nor of my property,
and however happy we may be in our home life and however many
children we may have, there will be no real tie between us.  They
will be Karenins.  You can understand the bitterness and horror
of this position!  I have tried to speak of this to Anna.  It
irritates her.  She does not understand, and to her I cannot
speak plainly of all this.  Now look at another side.  I am
happy, happy in her love, but I must have occupation.  I have
found occupation, and am proud of what I am doing and consider it
nobler than the pursuits of my former companions at court and in
the army.  And most certainly I would not change the work I am
doing for theirs.  I am working here, settled in my own place,
and I am happy and contented, and we need nothing more to make
us happy.  I love my work here.  _Ce n'est pas un pis-aller,_
on the contrary..."

Darya Alexandrovna noticed that at this point in his explanation
he grew confused, and she did not quite understand this
digression, but she felt that having once begun to speak of
matters near his heart, of which he could not speak to Anna, he
was now making a clean breast of everything, and that the
question of his pursuits in the country fell into the same
category of matters near his heart, as the question of his
relations with Anna.

"Well, I will go on," he said, collecting himself.  "The great
thing is that as I work I want to have a conviction that what I
am doing will not die with me, that I shall have heirs to come
after me,--and this I have not.  Conceive the position of a man
who knows that his children, the children of the woman he loves,
will not be his, but will belong to someone who hates them and
cares nothing about them!  It is awful!"

He paused, evidently much moved.

"Yes, indeed, I see that.  But what can Anna do?" queried Darya
Alexandrovna.

"Yes, that brings me to the object of my conversation," he said,
calming himself with an effort.  "Anna can, it depends on
her....  Even to petition the Tsar for legitimization, a divorce
is essential.  And that depends on Anna.  Her husband agreed to a
divorce--at that time your husband had arranged it completely.
And now, I know, he would not refuse it.  It is only a matter of
writing to him.  He said plainly at that time that if she
expressed the desire, he would not refuse.  Of course," he said
gloomily, "it is one of those Pharisaical cruelties of which only
such heartless men are capable.  He knows what agony any
recollection of him must give her, and knowing her, he must have
a letter from her.  I can understand that it is agony to her.
But the matter is of such importance, that one must _passer
pardessus toutes ces finesses de sentiment.  Il y va du bonheur
et de l'existence d'Anne et de ses enfants._  I won't speak of
myself, though it's hard for me, very hard," he said, with an
expression as though he were threatening someone for its being
hard for him.  "And so it is, princess, that I am shamelessly
clutching at you as an anchor of salvation.  Help me to persuade
her to write to him and ask for a divorce."

"Yes, of course," Darya Alexandrovna said dreamily, as she
vividly recalled her last interview with Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Yes, of course," she repeated with decision, thinking of Anna.

"Use your influence with her, make her write.  I don't like--I'm
almost unable to speak about this to her."

"Very well, I will talk to her.  But how is it she does not
think of it herself?" said Darya Alexandrovna, and for some
reason she suddenly at that point recalled Anna's strange new
habit of half-closing her eyes.  And she remembered that Anna
drooped her eyelids just when the deeper questions of life were
touched upon.  "Just as though she half-shut her eyes to her own
life, so as not to see everything," thought Dolly.  "Yes, indeed,
for my own sake and for hers I will talk to her," Dolly said in
reply to his look of gratitude.

They got up and walked to the house.



Chapter 22


When Anna found Dolly at home before her, she looked intently in
her eyes, as though questioning her about the talk she had had
with Vronsky, but she made no inquiry in words.

"I believe it's dinner time," she said.  "We've not seen each
other at all yet.  I am reckoning on the evening.  Now I want to
go and dress.  I expect you do too; we all got splashed at the
buildings."

Dolly went to her room and she felt amused.  To change her dress
was impossible, for she had already put on her best dress.  But
in order to signify in some way her preparation for dinner, she
asked the maid to brush her dress, changed her cuffs and tie, and
put some lace on her head.

"This is all I can do," she said with a smile to Anna, who came
in to her in a third dress, again of extreme simplicity.

"Yes, we are too formal here," she said, as it were apologizing
for her magnificence.  "Alexey is delighted at your visit, as he
rarely is at anything.  He has completely lost his heart to you,"
she added.  "You're not tired?"

There was no time for talking about anything before dinner.
Going into the drawing room they found Princess Varvara already
there, and the gentlemen of the party in black frock-coats.  The
architect wore a swallow-tail coat.  Vronsky presented the
doctor and the steward to his guest.  The architect he had
already introduced to her at the hospital.

A stout butler, resplendent with a smoothly shaven round chin and
a starched white cravat, announced that dinner was ready, and the
ladies got up.  Vronsky asked Sviazhsky to take in Anna
Arkadyevna, and himself offered his arm to Dolly.  Veslovsky was
before Tushkevitch in offering his arm to Princess Varvara, so
that Tushkevitch with the steward and the doctor walked in alone.

The dinner, the dining room, the service, the waiting at table,
the wine, and the food, were not simply in keeping with the
general tone of modern luxury throughout all the house, but
seemed even more sumptuous and modern.  Darya Alexandrovna
watched this luxury which was novel to her, and as a good
housekeeper used to managing a household--although she never
dreamed of adapting anything she saw to her own household, as it
was all in a style of luxury far above her own manner of
living--she could not help scrutinizing every detail, and
wondering how and by whom it was all done.  Vassenka Veslovsky,
her husband, and even Sviazhsky, and many other people she knew,
would never have considered this question, and would have readily
believed what every well-bred host tries to make his guests feel,
that is, that all that is well-ordered in his house has cost him,
the host, no trouble whatever, but comes of itself.  Darya
Alexandrovna was well aware that even porridge for the children's
breakfast does not come of itself, and that therefore, where so
complicated and magnificent a style of luxury was maintained,
someone must give earnest attention to its organization.  And
from the glance with which Alexey Kirillovitch scanned the table,
from the way he nodded to the butler, and offered Darya
Alexandrovna her choice between cold soup and hot soup, she saw
that it was all organized and maintained by the care of the
master of the house himself.  It was evident that it all rested
no more upon Anna than upon Veslovsky.  She, Sviazhsky, the
princess, and Veslovsky, were equally guests, with light hearts
enjoying what had been arranged for them.

Anna was the hostess only in conducting the conversation.  The
conversation was a difficult one for the lady of the house at a
small table with persons present, like the steward and the
architect, belonging to a completely different world, struggling
not to be overawed by an elegance to which they were
unaccustomed, and unable to sustain a large share in the general
conversation.  But this difficult conversation Anna directed with
her usual tact and naturalness, and indeed she did so with actual
enjoyment, as Darya Alexandrovna observed.  The conversation
began about the row Tushkevitch and Veslovsky had taken alone
together in the boat, and Tushkevitch began describing the last
boat races in Petersburg at the Yacht Club.  But Anna, seizing
the first pause, at once turned to the architect to draw him out
of his silence.

"Nikolay Ivanitch was struck," she said, meaning Sviazhsky, "at
the progress the new building had made since he was here last;
but I am there every day, and every day I wonder at the rate at
which it grows."

"It's first-rate working with his excellency," said the architect
with a smile (he was respectful and composed, though with a sense
of his own dignity).  "It's a very different matter to have to do
with the district authorities.  Where one would have to write out
sheaves of papers, here I call upon the count, and in three words
we settle the business."

"The American way of doing business," said Sviazhsky, with a
smile.

"Yes, there they build in a rational fashion..."

The conversation passed to the misuse of political power in the
United States, but Anna quickly brought it round to another
topic, so as to draw the steward into talk.

"Have you ever seen a reaping machine?" she said, addressing
Darya Alexandrovna.  "We had just ridden over to look at one when
we met.  It's the first time I ever saw one."

"How do they work?" asked Dolly.

"Exactly like little scissors.  A plank and a lot of little
scissors.  Like this."

Anna took a knife and fork in her beautiful white hands covered
with rings, and began showing how the machine worked.  It was
clear that she saw nothing would be understood from her
explanation; but aware that her talk was pleasant and her hands
beautiful she went on explaining.

"More like little penknives," Veslovsky said playfully, never
taking his eyes off her.

Anna gave a just perceptible smile, but made no answer.  "Isn't
it true, Karl Fedoritch, that it's just like little scissors?"
she said to the steward.

"_Oh, ja,_" answered the German.  _"Es it ein ganz einfaches Ding,"_
and he began to explain the construction of the machine.

"It's a pity it doesn't bind too.  I saw one at the Vienna
exhibition, which binds with a wire," said Sviazhsky.  "They
would be more profitable in use."

_"Es kommt drauf an....  Der Preis vom Draht muss ausgerechnet
werden."_  And the German, roused from his taciturnity, turned to
Vronsky.  _"Das lässt sich ausrechnen, Erlaucht."_  The German was
just feeling in the pocket where were his pencil and the
notebook he always wrote in, but recollecting that he was at a
dinner, and observing Vronsky's chilly glance, he checked
himself.  _"Zu compliziert, macht zu viel Klopot,"_ he concluded.

_"Wünscht man Dochots, so hat man auch Klopots,"_ said Vassenka
Veslovsky, mimicking the German.  _"J'adore l'allemand,"_ he
addressed Anna again with the same smile.

_"Cessez,"_ she said with playful severity.

"We expected to find you in the fields, Vassily Semyonitch," she
said to the doctor, a sickly-looking man; "have you been there?"

"I went there, but I had taken flight," the doctor answered
with gloomy jocoseness.

"Then you've taken a good constitutional?"

"Splendid!"

"Well, and how was the old woman?  I hope it's not typhus?"

"Typhus it is not, but it's taking a bad turn."

"What a pity!" said Anna, and having thus paid the dues of
civility to her domestic circle, she turned to her own friends.

"It would be a hard task, though, to construct a machine from
your description, Anna Arkadyevna," Sviazhsky said jestingly.

"Oh, no, why so?" said Anna with a smile that betrayed that she
knew there was something charming in her disquisitions upon the
machine that had been noticed by Sviazhsky.  This new trait of
girlish coquettishness made an unpleasant impression on Dolly.

"But Anna Arkadyevna's knowledge of architecture is marvelous,"
said Tushkevitch.

"To be sure, I heard Anna Arkadyevna talking yesterday about
plinths and damp-courses," said Veslovsky.  "Have I got it
right?"

"There's nothing marvelous about it, when one sees and hears so
much of it," said Anna.  "But, I dare say, you don't even know
what houses are made of?"

Darya Alexandrovna saw that Anna disliked the tone of raillery
that existed between her and Veslovsky, but fell in with it
against her will.

Vronsky acted in this matter quite differently from Levin.  He
obviously attached no significance to Veslovsky's chattering; on
the contrary, he encouraged his jests.

"Come now, tell us, Veslovsky, how are the stones held together?"

"By cement, of course."

"Bravo!  And what is cement?"

"Oh, some sort of paste...no, putty," said Veslovsky, raising
a general laugh.

The company at dinner, with the exception of the doctor, the
architect, and the steward, who remained plunged in gloomy
silence, kept up a conversation that never paused, glancing off
one subject, fastening on another, and at times stinging one or
the other to the quick.  Once Darya Alexandrovna felt wounded to
the quick, and got so hot that she positively flushed and
wondered afterwards whether she had said anything extreme or
unpleasant.  Sviazhsky began talking of Levin, describing his
strange view that machinery is simply pernicious in its effects
on Russian agriculture.

"I have not the pleasure of knowing this M. Levin," Vronsky said,
smiling, "but most likely he has never seen the machines he
condemns; or if he has seen and tried any, it must have been
after a queer fashion, some Russian imitation, not a machine from
abroad.  What sort of views can anyone have on such a subject?"

"Turkish views, in general," Veslovsky said, turning to Anna with
a smile.

"I can't defend his opinions," Darya Alexandrovna said, firing
up; "but I can say that he's a highly cultivated man, and if he
were here he would know very well how to answer you, though I am
not capable of doing so."

"I like him extremely, and we are great friends," Sviazhsky said,
smiling good-naturedly.  "_Mais pardon, il est un petit peu toqué;_
he maintains, for instance, that district councils and
arbitration boards are all of no use, and he is unwilling to take
part in anything."

"It's our Russian apathy," said Vronsky, pouring water from an
iced decanter into a delicate glass on a high stem; "we've no
sense of the duties our privileges impose upon us, and so we
refuse to recognize these duties."

"I know no man more strict in the performance of his duties,"
said Darya Alexandrovna, irritated by Vronsky's tone of
superiority.

"For my part," pursued Vronsky, who was evidently for some reason
or other keenly affected by this conversation, "such as I am, I
am, on the contrary, extremely grateful for the honor they have
done me, thanks to Nikolay Ivanitch" (he indicated Sviazhsky),
"in electing me a justice of the peace.  I consider that for me
the duty of being present at the session, of judging some
peasants' quarrel about a horse, is as important as anything I
can do.  And I shall regard it as an honor if they elect me for
the district council.  It's only in that way I can pay for the
advantages I enjoy as a landowner.  Unluckily they don't
understand the weight that the big landowners ought to have in
the state."

It was strange to Darya Alexandrovna to hear how serenely
confident he was of being right at his own table.  She thought
how Levin, who believed the opposite, was just as positive in his
opinions at his own table.  But she loved Levin, and so she was
on his side.

"So we can reckon upon you, count, for the coming elections?"
said Sviazhsky.  "But you must come a little beforehand, so as to
be on the spot by the eighth.  If you would do me the honor to
stop with me."

"I rather agree with your beau-frère," said Anna, "though not
quite on the same ground as he," she added with a smile.  "I'm
afraid that we have too many of these public duties in these
latter days.  Just as in old days there were so many government
functionaries that one had to call in a functionary for every
single thing, so now everyone's doing some sort of public duty.
Alexey has been here now six months, and he's a member, I do
believe, of five or six different public bodies.  _Du train que
cela va,_ the whole time will be wasted on it.  And I'm afraid
that with such a multiplicity of these bodies, they'll end in
being a mere form.  How many are you a member of, Nikolay
Ivanitch?" she turned to Sviazhsky--"over twenty, I fancy."

Anna spoke lightly, but irritation could be discerned in her
tone.  Darya Alexandrovna, watching Anna and Vronsky attentively,
detected it instantly.  She noticed, too, that as she spoke
Vronsky's face had immediately taken a serious and obstinate
expression.  Noticing this, and that Princess Varvara at once
made haste to change the conversation by talking of Petersburg
acquaintances, and remembering what Vronsky had without apparent
connection said in the garden of his work in the country, Dolly
surmised that this question of public activity was connected with
some deep private disagreement between Anna and Vronsky.

The dinner, the wine, the decoration of the table were all very
good; but it was all like what Darya Alexandrovna had seen at
formal dinners and balls which of late years had become quite
unfamiliar to her; it all had the same impersonal and constrained
character, and so on an ordinary day and in a little circle of
friends it made a disagreeable impression on her.

After dinner they sat on the terrace, then they proceeded to play
lawn tennis.  The players, divided into two parties, stood on
opposite sides of a tightly drawn net with gilt poles on the
carefully leveled and rolled croquet-ground.  Darya Alexandrovna
made an attempt to play, but it was a long time before she could
understand the game, and by the time she did understand it, she
was so tired that she sat down with Princess Varvara and simply
looked on at the players.  Her partner, Tushkevitch, gave up
playing too, but the others kept the game up for a long time.
Sviazhsky and Vronsky both played very well and seriously.  They
kept a sharp lookout on the balls served to them, and without
haste or getting in each other's way, they ran adroitly up to
them, waited for the rebound, and neatly and accurately returned
them over the net.  Veslovsky played worse than the others.  He
was too eager, but he kept the players lively with his high
spirits.  His laughter and outcries never paused.  Like the other
men of the party, with the ladies' permission, he took off his
coat, and his solid, comely figure in his white shirt-sleeves,
with his red perspiring face and his impulsive movements, made a
picture that imprinted itself vividly on the memory.

When Darya Alexandrovna lay in bed that night, as soon as she
closed her eyes, she saw Vassenka Veslovsky flying about the
croquet ground.

During the game Darya Alexandrovna was not enjoying herself.  She
did not like the light tone of raillery that was kept up all the
time between Vassenka Veslovsky and Anna, and the unnaturalness
altogether of grown-up people, all alone without children,
playing at a child's game.  But to avoid breaking up the party
and to get through the time somehow, after a rest she joined the
game again, and pretended to be enjoying it.  All that day it
seemed to her as though she were acting in a theater with actors
cleverer than she, and that her bad acting was spoiling the whole
performance.  She had come with the intention of staying two
days, if all went well.  But in the evening, during the game, she
made up her mind that she would go home next day.  The maternal
cares and worries, which she had so hated on the way, now, after
a day spent without them, struck her in quite another light, and
tempted her back to them.

When, after evening tea and a row by night in the boat, Darya
Alexandrovna went alone to her room, took off her dress, and
began arranging her thin hair for the night, she had a great
sense of relief.

It was positively disagreeable to her to think that Anna was
coming to see her immediately.  She longed to be alone with her
own thoughts.



Chapter 23


Dolly was wanting to go to bed when Anna came in to see her,
attired for the night.  In the course of the day Anna had several
times begun to speak of matters near her heart, and every time
after a few words she had stopped: "Afterwards, by ourselves,
we'll talk about everything.  I've got so much I want to tell
you," she said.

Now they were by themselves, and Anna did not know what to talk
about.  She sat in the window looking at Dolly, and going over in
her own mind all the stores of intimate talk which had seemed so
inexhaustible beforehand, and she found nothing.  At that moment
it seemed to her that everything had been said already.

"Well, what of Kitty?" she said with a heavy sigh, looking
penitently at Dolly.  "Tell me the truth, Dolly: isn't she angry
with me?"

"Angry?  Oh, no!" said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling.

"But she hates me, despises me?"

"Oh, no!  But you know that sort of thing isn't forgiven."

"Yes, yes," said Anna, turning away and looking out of the open
window.  "But I was not to blame.  And who is to blame?  What's
the meaning of being to blame?  Could it have been otherwise?
What do you think?  Could it possibly have happened that you
didn't become the wife of Stiva?"

"Really, I don't know.  But this is what I want you to tell
me..."

"Yes, yes, but we've not finished about Kitty.  Is she happy?
He's a very nice man, they say."

"He's much more than very nice.  I don't know a better man."

"Ah, how glad I am! I'm so glad! Much more than very nice," she
repeated.

Dolly smiled.

"But tell me about yourself.  We've a great deal to talk about.
And I've had a talk with..." Dolly did not know what to call
him.  She felt it awkward to call him either the count or Alexey
Kirillovitch.

"With Alexey," said Anna, "I know what you talked about.  But I
wanted to ask you directly what you think of me, of my life?"

"How am I to say like that straight off?  I really don't know."

"No, tell me all the same....  You see my life.  But you mustn't
forget that you're seeing us in the summer, when you have come to
us and we are not alone....  But we came here early in the
spring, lived quite alone, and shall be alone again, and I desire
nothing better.  But imagine me living alone without him, alone,
and that will be...I see by everything that it will often be
repeated, that he will be half the time away from home," she
said, getting up and sitting down close by Dolly.

"Of course," she interrupted Dolly, who would have answered, "of
course I won't try to keep him by force.  I don't keep him
indeed.  The races are just coming, his horses are running, he
will go.  I'm very glad.  But think of me, fancy my position....
But what's the use of talking about it?"  She smiled.  "Well,
what did he talk about with you?"

"He spoke of what I want to speak about of myself, and it's easy
for me to be his advocate; of whether there is not a possibility
...whether you could not..." (Darya Alexandrovna hesitated)
"correct, improve your position....  You know how I look at
it....  But all the same, if possible, you should get
married...."

"Divorce, you mean?" said Anna.  "Do you know, the only woman who
came to see me in Petersburg was Betsy Tverskaya?  You know her,
of course?  _Au fond, c'est la femme la plus depraveé qui existe._
She had an intrigue with Tushkevitch, deceiving her husband in
the basest way.  And she told me that she did not care to know me
so long as my position was irregular.  Don't imagine I would
compare...I know you, darling.  But I could not help
remembering....  Well, so what did he say to you?" she repeated.

"He said that he was unhappy on your account and his own.
Perhaps you will say that it's egoism, but what a legitimate and
noble egoism.  He wants first of all to legitimize his daughter,
and to be your husband, to have a legal right to you."

"What wife, what slave can be so utterly a slave as I, in my
position?" she put in gloomily.

"The chief thing he desires...he desires that you should not
suffer."

"That's impossible.  Well?"

"Well, and the most legitimate desire--he wishes that your
children should have a name."

"What children?" Anna said, not looking at Dolly, and half
closing her eyes.

"Annie and those to come..."

"He need not trouble on that score; I shall have no more
children."

"How can you tell that you won't?"

"I shall not, because I don't wish it." And, in spite of all her
emotion, Anna smiled, as she caught the naïve expression of
curiosity, wonder, and horror on Dolly's face.

"The doctor told me after my illness..."

"Impossible!" said Dolly, opening her eyes wide.

For her this was one of those discoveries the consequences and
deductions from which are so immense that all that one feels for
the first instant is that it is impossible to take it all in, and
that one will have to reflect a great, great deal upon it.

This discovery, suddenly throwing light on all those families of
one or two children, which had hitherto been so incomprehensible
to her, aroused so many ideas, reflections, and contradictory
emotions, that she had nothing to say, and simply gazed with
wide-open eyes of wonder at Anna.  This was the very thing she
had been dreaming of, but now learning that it was possible, she
was horrified.  She felt that it was too simple a solution of too
complicated a problem.

_"N'est-ce pas immoral?"_ was all she said, after a brief pause.

"Why so?  Think, I have a choice between two alternatives: either
to be with child, that is an invalid, or to be the friend and
companion of my husband--practically my husband," Anna said in a
tone intentionally superficial and frivolous.

"Yes, yes," said Darya Alexandrovna, hearing the very arguments
she had used to herself, and not finding the same force in them
as before.

"For you, for other people," said Anna, as though divining her
thoughts, "there may be reason to hesitate; but for me....  You
must consider, I am not his wife; he loves me as long as he
loves me.  And how am I to keep his love?  Not like this!"

She moved her white hands in a curve before her waist with
extraordinary rapidity, as happens during moments of excitement;
ideas and memories rushed into Darya Alexandrovna's head.  "I,"
she thought, "did not keep my attraction for Stiva; he left me
for others, and the first woman for whom he betrayed me did not
keep him by being always pretty and lively.  He deserted her and
took another.  And can Anna attract and keep Count Vronsky in
that way?  If that is what he looks for, he will find dresses and
manners still more attractive and charming.  And however white
and beautiful her bare arms are, however beautiful her full
figure and her eager face under her black curls, he will find
something better still, just as my disgusting, pitiful, and
charming husband does."

Dolly made no answer, she merely sighed.  Anna noticed this sigh,
indicating dissent, and she went on.  In her armory she had other
arguments so strong that no answer could be made to them.

"Do you say that it's not right?  But you must consider," she
went on; "you forget my position.  How can I desire children?
I'm not speaking of the suffering, I'm not afraid of that.  Think
only, what are my children to be?  Ill-fated children, who will
have to bear a stranger's name.  For the very fact of their birth
they will be forced to be ashamed of their mother, their father,
their birth."

"But that is just why a divorce is necessary."  But Anna did not
hear her.  She longed to give utterance to all the arguments with
which she had so many times convinced herself.

"What is reason given me for, if I am not to use it to avoid
bringing unhappy beings into the world!"  She looked at Dolly,
but without waiting for a reply she went on:

"I should always feel I had wronged these unhappy children," she
said.  "If they are not, at any rate they are not unhappy; while
if they are unhappy, I alone should be to blame for it."

These were the very arguments Darya Alexandrovna had used in her
own reflections; but she heard them without understanding them.
"How can one wrong creatures that don't exist?" she thought.  And
all at once the idea struck her: could it possibly, under any
circumstances, have been better for her favorite Grisha if he had
never existed?  And this seemed to her so wild, so strange, that
she shook her head to drive away this tangle of whirling, mad
ideas.

"No, I don't know; it's not right," was all she said, with an
expression of disgust on her face.

"Yes, but you mustn't forget that you and I....  And besides
that," added Anna, in spite of the wealth of her arguments and
the poverty of Dolly's objections, seeming still to admit that it
was not right, "don't forget the chief point, that I am not now
in the same position as you.  For you the question is:  do you
desire not to have any more children; while for me it is: do I
desire to have them?  And that's a great difference.  You must
see that I can't desire it in my position."

Darya Alexandrovna made no reply.  She suddenly felt that she had
got far away from Anna; that there lay between them a barrier of
questions on which they could never agree, and about which it was
better not to speak.



Chapter 24


"Then there is all the more reason for you to legalize your
position, if possible," said Dolly.

"Yes, if possible," said Anna, speaking all at once in an utterly
different tone, subdued and mournful.

"Surely you don't mean a divorce is impossible?  I was told your
husband had consented to it."

"Dolly, I don't want to talk about that."

"Oh, we won't then," Darya Alexandrovna hastened to say, noticing
the expression of suffering on Anna's face.  "All I see is that
you take too gloomy a view of things."

"I?  Not at all!  I'm always bright and happy.  You see, _je fais
des passions._  Veslovsky..."

"Yes, to tell the truth, I don't like Veslovsky's tone," said
Darya Alexandrovna, anxious to change the subject.

"Oh, that's nonsense!  It amuses Alexey, and that's all; but he's
a boy, and quite under my control.  You know, I turn him as I
please.  It's just as it might be with your Grisha....  Dolly!"--
she suddenly changed the subject--"you say I take too gloomy a
view of things.  You can't understand.  It's too awful! I try not
to take any view of it at all."

"But I think you ought to.  You ought to do all you can."

"But what can I do?  Nothing.  You tell me to marry Alexey, and
say I don't think about it.  I don't think about it!" she
repeated, and a flush rose into her face.  She got up,
straightening her chest, and sighed heavily.  With her light step
she began pacing up and down the room, stopping now and then.  "I
don't think of it?  Not a day, not an hour passes that I don't
think of it, and blame myself for thinking of it...because
thinking of that may drive me mad.  Drive me mad!" she repeated.
"When I think of it, I can't sleep without morphine.  But never
mind.  Let us talk quietly.  They tell me, divorce.  In the first
place, he won't give me a divorce.  He's under the influence of
Countess Lidia Ivanovna now."

Darya Alexandrovna, sitting erect on a chair, turned her head,
following Anna with a face of sympathetic suffering.

"You ought to make the attempt," she said softly.

"Suppose I make the attempt.  What does it mean?" she said,
evidently giving utterance to a thought, a thousand times thought
over and learned by heart.  "It means that I, hating him, but
still recognizing that I have wronged him--and I consider him
magnanimous--that I humiliate myself to write to him....  Well,
suppose I make the effort; I do it.  Either I receive a
humiliating refusal or consent....  Well, I have received his
consent, say..." Anna was at that moment at the furthest end
of the room, and she stopped there, doing something to the
curtain at the window.  "I receive his consent, but my...my
son?  They won't give him up to me.  He will grow up despising
me, with his father, whom I've abandoned.  Do you see, I love...
equally, I think, but both more than myself--two creatures,
Seryozha and Alexey."

She came out into the middle of the room and stood facing Dolly,
with her arms pressed tightly across her chest.  In her white
dressing gown her figure seemed more than usually grand and
broad.  She bent her head, and with shining, wet eyes looked from
under her brows at Dolly, a thin little pitiful figure in her
patched dressing jacket and nightcap, shaking all over with
emotion.

"It is only those two creatures that I love, and one excludes the
other.  I can't have them together, and that's the only thing I
want.  And since I can't have that, I don't care about the rest.
I don't care about anything, anything.  And it will end one way
or another, and so I can't, I don't like to talk of it.  So don't
blame me, don't judge me for anything.  You can't with your pure
heart understand all that I'm suffering."  She went up, sat down
beside Dolly, and with a guilty look, peeped into her face and
took her hand.

"What are you thinking?  What are you thinking about me?  Don't
despise me.  I don't deserve contempt.  I'm simply unhappy.  If
anyone is unhappy, I am," she articulated, and turning away, she
burst into tears.

Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna said her prayers and went to bed.
She had felt for Anna with all her heart while she was speaking
to her, but now she could not force herself to think of her.  The
memories of home and of her children rose up in her imagination
with a peculiar charm quite new to her, with a sort of new
brilliance.  That world of her own seemed to her now so sweet and
precious that she would not on any account spend an extra day
outside it, and she made up her mind that she would certainly go
back next day.

Anna meantime went back to her boudoir, took a wine glass and
dropped into it several drops of a medicine, of which the
principal ingredient was morphine.  After drinking it off and
sitting still a little while, she went into her bedroom in a
soothed and more cheerful frame of mind.

When she went into the bedroom, Vronsky looked intently at her.
He was looking for traces of the conversation which he knew that,
staying so long in Dolly's room, she must have had with her.  But
in her expression of restrained excitement, and of a sort of
reserve, he could find nothing but the beauty that always
bewitched him afresh though he was used to it, the consciousness
of it, and the desire that it should affect him.  He did not want
to ask her what they had been talking of, but he hoped that she
would tell him something of her own accord.  But she only said:

"I am so glad you like Dolly.  You do, don't you?"

"Oh, I've known her a long while, you know.  She's very
good-hearted, I suppose, _mais excessivement terre-à-terre._
Still, I'm very glad to see her."

He took Anna's hand and looked inquiringly into her eyes.

Misinterpreting the look, she smiled to him.  Next morning, in
spite of the protests of her hosts, Darya Alexandrovna prepared
for her homeward journey.  Levin's coachman, in his by no means
new coat and shabby hat, with his ill-matched horses and his
coach with the patched mud-guards, drove with gloomy
determination into the covered gravel approach.

Darya Alexandrovna disliked taking leave of Princess Varvara and
the gentlemen of the party.  After a day spent together, both she
and her hosts were distinctly aware that they did not get on
together, and that it was better for them not to meet.  Only Anna
was sad.  She knew that now, from Dolly's departure, no one again
would stir up within her soul the feelings that had been roused
by their conversation.  It hurt her to stir up these feelings,
but yet she knew that that was the best part of her soul, and
that that part of her soul would quickly be smothered in the life
she was leading.

As she drove out into the open country, Darya Alexandrovna had a
delightful sense of relief, and she felt tempted to ask the two
men how they had liked being at Vronsky's, when suddenly the
coachman, Philip, expressed himself unasked:

"Rolling in wealth they may be, but three pots of oats was all
they gave us.  Everything cleared up till there wasn't a grain
left by cockcrow.  What are three pots?  A mere mouthful!  And
oats now down to forty-five kopecks.  At our place, no fear, all
comers may have as much as they can eat."

"The master's a screw," put in the counting house clerk.

"Well, did you like their horses?" asked Dolly.

"The horses!--there's no two opinions about them.  And the food
was good.  But it seemed to me sort of dreary there, Darya
Alexandrovna.  I don't know what you thought," he said, turning
his handsome, good-natured face to her.

"I thought so too.  Well, shall we get home by evening?"

"Eh, we must!"

On reaching home and finding everyone entirely satisfactory and
particularly charming, Darya Alexandrovna began with great
liveliness telling them how she had arrived, how warmly they had
received her, of the luxury and good taste in which the Vronskys
lived, and of their recreations, and she would not allow a word
to be said against them.

"One has to know Anna and Vronsky--I have got to know him better
now--to see how nice they are, and how touching," she said,
speaking now with perfect sincerity, and forgetting the vague
feeling of dissatisfaction and awkwardness she had experienced
there.



Chapter 25


Vronsky and Anna spent the whole summer and part of the winter
in the country, living in just the same condition, and still
taking no steps to obtain a divorce.  It was an understood thing
between them that they should not go away anywhere; but both
felt, the longer they lived alone, especially in the autumn,
without guests in the house, that they could not stand this
existence, and that they would have to alter it.

Their life was apparently such that nothing better could be
desired.  They had the fullest abundance of everything; they had
a child, and both had occupation.  Anna devoted just as much care
to her appearance when they had no visitors, and she did a great
deal of reading, both of novels and of what serious literature
was in fashion.  She ordered all the books that were praised in
the foreign papers and reviews she received, and read them with
that concentrated attention which is only given to what is read
in seclusion.  Moreover, every subject that was of interest to
Vronsky, she studied in books and special journals, so that he
often went straight to her with questions relating to agriculture
or architecture, sometimes even with questions relating to
horse-breeding or sport.  He was amazed at her knowledge, her
memory, and at first was disposed to doubt it, to ask for
confirmation of her facts; and she would find what he asked for
in some book, and show it to him.

The building of the hospital, too, interested her.  She did not
merely assist, but planned and suggested a great deal herself.
But her chief thought was still of herself--how far she was dear
to Vronsky, how far she could make up to him for all he had given
up.  Vronsky appreciated this desire not only to please, but to
serve him, which had become the sole aim of her existence, but at
the same time he wearied of the loving snares in which she tried
to hold him fast.  As time went on, and he saw himself more and
more often held fast in these snares, he had an ever growing
desire, not so much to escape from them, as to try whether they
hindered his freedom.  Had it not been for this growing desire to
be free, not to have scenes every time he wanted to go to the
town to a meeting or a race, Vronsky would have been perfectly
satisfied with his life.  The rôle he had taken up, the rôle of a
wealthy landowner, one of that class which ought to be the very
heart of the Russian aristocracy, was entirely to his taste; and
now, after spending six months in that character, he derived even
greater satisfaction from it.  And his management of his estate,
which occupied and absorbed him more and more, was most
successful.  In spite of the immense sums cost him by the
hospital, by machinery, by cows ordered from Switzerland, and
many other things, he was convinced that he was not wasting, but
increasing his substance.  In all matters affecting income, the
sales of timber, wheat, and wool, the letting of lands, Vronsky
was hard as a rock, and knew well how to keep up prices.  In all
operations on a large scale on this and his other estates, he
kept to the simplest methods involving no risk, and in trifling
details he was careful and exacting to an extreme degree.  In
spite of all the cunning and ingenuity of the German steward, who
would try to tempt him into purchases by making his original
estimate always far larger than really required, and then
representing to Vronsky that he might get the thing cheaper, and
so make a profit, Vronsky did not give in.  He listened to his
steward, cross-examined him, and only agreed to his suggestions
when the implement to be ordered or constructed was the very
newest, not yet known in Russia, and likely to excite wonder.
Apart from such exceptions, he resolved upon an increased outlay
only where there was a surplus, and in making such an outlay he
went into the minutest details, and insisted on getting the very
best for his money; so that by the method on which he managed his
affairs, it was clear that he was not wasting, but increasing his
substance.

In October there were the provincial elections in the Kashinsky
province, where were the estates of Vronsky, Sviazhsky,
Koznishev, Oblonsky, and a small part of Levin's land.

These elections were attracting public attention from several
circumstances connected with them, and also from the people
taking part in them.  There had been a great deal of talk about
them, and great preparations were being made for them.  Persons
who never attended the elections were coming from Moscow, from
Petersburg, and from abroad to attend these.  Vronsky had long
before promised Sviazhsky to go to them.  Before the elections
Sviazhsky, who often visited Vozdvizhenskoe, drove over to fetch
Vronsky.  On the day before there had been almost a quarrel
between Vronsky and Anna over this proposed expedition.  It was
the very dullest autumn weather, which is so dreary in the
country, and so, preparing himself for a struggle, Vronsky, with
a hard and cold expression, informed Anna of his departure as he
had never spoken to her before.  But, to his surprise, Anna
accepted the information with great composure, and merely asked
when he would be back.  He looked intently at her, at a loss to
explain this composure.  She smiled at his look.  He knew that
way she had of withdrawing into herself, and knew that it only
happened when she had determined upon something without letting
him know her plans.  He was afraid of this; but he was so anxious
to avoid a scene that he kept up appearances, and half sincerely
believed in what he longed to believe in--her reasonableness.

"I hope you won't be dull?"

"I hope not," said Anna.  "I got a box of books yesterday from
Gautier's.  No, I shan't be dull."

"She's trying to take that tone, and so much the better," he
thought, "or else it would be the same thing over and over
again."

And he set off for the elections without appealing to her for a
candid explanation.  It was the first time since the beginning of
their intimacy that he had parted from her without a full
explanation.  From one point of view this troubled him, but on
the other side he felt that it was better so.  "At first there
will be, as this time, something undefined kept back, and then
she will get used to it.  In any case I can give up anything for
her, but not my masculine independence," he thought.



Chapter 26


In September Levin moved to Moscow for Kitty's confinement.  He
had spent a whole month in Moscow with nothing to do, when Sergey
Ivanovitch, who had property in the Kashinsky province, and took
great interest in the question of the approaching elections, made
ready to set off to the elections.  He invited his brother, who
had a vote in the Seleznevsky district, to come with him.  Levin
had, moreover, to transact in Kashin some extremely important
business relating to the wardship of land and to the receiving of
certain redemption money for his sister, who was abroad.

Levin still hesitated, but Kitty, who saw that he was bored in
Moscow, and urged him to go, on her own authority ordered him the
proper nobleman's uniform, costing seven pounds.  And that seven
pounds paid for the uniform was the chief cause that finally
decided Levin to go.  He went to Kashin....

Levin had been six days in Kashin, visiting the assembly each
day, and busily engaged about his sister's business, which still
dragged on.  The district marshals of nobility were all occupied
with the elections, and it was impossible to get the simplest
thing done that depended upon the court of wardship.  The other
matter, the payment of the sums due, was met too by difficulties.
After long negotiations over the legal details, the money was at
last ready to be paid; but the notary, a most obliging person,
could not hand over the order, because it must have the signature
of the president, and the president, though he had not given over
his duties to a deputy, was at the elections.  All these worrying
negotiations, this endless going from place to place, and talking
with pleasant and excellent people, who quite saw the
unpleasantness of the petitioner's position, but were powerless
to assist him--all these efforts that yielded no result, led to a
feeling of misery in Levin akin to the mortifying helplessness
one experiences in dreams when one tries to use physical force.
He felt this frequently as he talked to his most good-natured
solicitor.  This solicitor did, it seemed, everything possible,
and strained every nerve to get him out of his difficulties.  "I
tell you what you might try," he said more than once; "go to
so-and-so and so-and-so," and the solicitor drew up a regular
plan for getting round the fatal point that hindered everything.
But he would add immediately, "It'll mean some delay, anyway, but
you might try it."  And Levin did try, and did go.  Everyone was
kind and civil, but the point evaded seemed to crop up again in
the end, and again to bar the way.  What was particularly trying,
was that Levin could not make out with whom he was struggling, to
whose interest it was that his business should not be done.  That
no one seemed to know; the solicitor certainly did not know.  If
Levin could have understood why, just as he saw why one can only
approach the booking office of a railway station in single file,
it would not have been so vexatious and tiresome to him.  But
with the hindrances that confronted him in his business, no one
could explain why they existed.

But Levin had changed a good deal since his marriage; he was
patient, and if he could not see why it was all arranged like
this, he told himself that he could not judge without knowing all
about it, and that most likely it must be so, and he tried not to
fret.

In attending the elections, too, and taking part in them, he
tried now not to judge, not to fall foul of them, but to
comprehend as fully as he could the question which was so
earnestly and ardently absorbing honest and excellent men whom he
respected.  Since his marriage there had been revealed to Levin
so many new and serious aspects of life that had previously,
through his frivolous attitude to them, seemed of no importance,
that in the question of the elections too he assumed and tried to
find some serious significance.

Sergey Ivanovitch explained to him the meaning and object of the
proposed revolution at the elections.  The marshal of the
province in whose hands the law had placed the control of so many
important public functions--the guardianship of wards (the very
department which was giving Levin so much trouble just now), the
disposal of large sums subscribed by the nobility of the
province, the high schools, female, male, and military, and
popular instruction on the new model, and finally, the district
council--the marshal of the province, Snetkov, was a nobleman of
the old school,--dissipating an immense fortune, a good-hearted
man, honest after his own fashion, but utterly without any
comprehension of the needs of modern days.  He always took, in
every question, the side of the nobility; he was positively
antagonistic to the spread of popular education, and he succeeded
in giving a purely party character to the district council which
ought by rights to be of such an immense importance.  What was
needed was to put in his place a fresh, capable, perfectly modern
man, of contemporary ideas, and to frame their policy so as from
the rights conferred upon the nobles, not as the nobility, but as
an element of the district council, to extract all the powers of
self-government that could possibly be derived from them.  In the
wealthy Kashinsky province, which always took the lead of other
provinces in everything, there was now such a preponderance of
forces that this policy, once carried through properly there,
might serve as a model for other provinces for all Russia.  And
hence the whole question was of the greatest importance.  It was
proposed to elect as marshal in place of Snetkov either
Sviazhsky, or, better still, Nevyedovsky, a former university
professor, a man of remarkable intelligence and a great friend of
Sergey Ivanovitch.

The meeting was opened by the governor, who made a speech to the
nobles, urging them to elect the public functionaries, not from
regard for persons, but for the service and welfare of their
fatherland, and hoping that the honorable nobility of the
Kashinsky province would, as at all former elections, hold their
duty as sacred, and vindicate the exalted confidence of the
monarch.

When he had finished with his speech, the governor walked out of
the hall, and the noblemen noisily and eagerly--some even
enthusiastically--followed him and thronged round him while he
put on his fur coat and conversed amicably with the marshal of
the province.  Levin, anxious to see into everything and not to
miss anything, stood there too in the crowd, and heard the
governor say: "Please tell Marya Ivanovna my wife is very sorry
she couldn't come to the Home."  And thereupon the nobles in high
good-humor sorted out their fur coats and all drove off to the
cathedral.

In the cathedral Levin, lifting his hand like the rest and
repeating the words of the archdeacon, swore with most terrible
oaths to do all the governor had hoped they would do.  Church
services always affected Levin, and as he uttered the words "I
kiss the cross," and glanced round at the crowd of young and old
men repeating the same, he felt touched.

On the second and third days there was business relating to the
finances of the nobility and the female high school, of no
importance whatever, as Sergey Ivanovitch explained, and Levin,
busy seeing after his own affairs, did not attend the meetings.
On the fourth day the auditing of the marshal's accounts took
place at the high table of the marshal of the province.  And then
there occurred the first skirmish between the new party and the
old.  The committee who had been deputed to verify the accounts
reported to the meeting that all was in order.  The marshal of
the province got up, thanked the nobility for their confidence,
and shed tears.  The nobles gave him a loud welcome, and shook
hands with him.  But at that instant a nobleman of Sergey
Ivanovitch's party said that he had heard that the committee had
not verified the accounts, considering such a verification an
insult to the marshal of the province.  One of the members of the
committee incautiously admitted this.  Then a small gentleman,
very young-looking but very malignant, began to say that it would
probably be agreeable to the marshal of the province to give an
account of his expenditures of the public moneys, and that the
misplaced delicacy of the members of the committee was depriving
him of this moral satisfaction.  Then the members of the
committee tried to withdraw their admission, and Sergey
Ivanovitch began to prove that they must logically admit either
that they had verified the accounts or that they had not, and he
developed this dilemma in detail.  Sergey Ivanovitch was answered
by the spokesman of the opposite party.  Then Sviazhsky spoke,
and then the malignant gentleman again.  The discussion lasted a
long time and ended in nothing.  Levin was surprised that they
should dispute upon this subject so long, especially as, when he
asked Sergey Ivanovitch whether he supposed that money had been
misappropriated, Sergey Ivanovitch answered:

"Oh, no!  He's an honest man.  But those old-fashioned methods of
paternal family arrangements in the management of provincial
affairs must be broken down."

On the fifth day came the elections of the district marshals.  It
was rather a stormy day in several districts.  In the Seleznevsky
district Sviazhsky was elected unanimously without a ballot, and
he gave a dinner that evening.



Chapter 27


The sixth day was fixed for the election of the marshal of the
province.

The rooms, large and small, were full of noblemen in all sorts of
uniforms.  Many had come only for that day.  Men who had not seen
each other for years, some from the Crimea, some from Petersburg,
some from abroad, met in the rooms of the Hall of Nobility.
There was much discussion around the governor's table under the
portrait of the Tsar.

The nobles, both in the larger and the smaller rooms, grouped
themselves in camps, and from their hostile and suspicious
glances, from the silence that fell upon them when outsiders
approached a group, and from the way that some, whispering
together, retreated to the farther corridor, it was evident that
each side had secrets from the other.  In appearance the noblemen
were sharply divided into two classes: the old and the new.  The
old were for the most part either in old uniforms of the
nobility, buttoned up closely, with spurs and hats, or in their
own special naval, cavalry, infantry, or official uniforms.  The
uniforms of the older men were embroidered in the old-fashioned
way with epaulets on their shoulders; they were unmistakably
tight and short in the waist, as though their wearers had grown
out of them.  The younger men wore the uniform of the nobility
with long waists and broad shoulders, unbuttoned over white
waistcoats, or uniforms with black collars and with the
embroidered badges of justices of the peace.  To the younger men
belonged the court uniforms that here and there brightened up the
crowd.

But the division into young and old did not correspond with the
division of parties.  Some of the young men, as Levin observed,
belonged to the old party; and some of the very oldest noblemen,
on the contrary, were whispering with Sviazhsky, and were
evidently ardent partisans of the new party.

Levin stood in the smaller room, where they were smoking and
taking light refreshments, close to his own friends, and
listening to what they were saying, he conscientiously exerted
all his intelligence trying to understand what was said.  Sergey
Ivanovitch was the center round which the others grouped
themselves.  He was listening at that moment to Sviazhsky and
Hliustov, the marshal of another district, who belonged to their
party.  Hliustov would not agree to go with his district to ask
Snetkov to stand, while Sviazhsky was persuading him to do so,
and Sergey Ivanovitch was approving of the plan.  Levin could not
make out why the opposition was to ask the marshal to stand whom
they wanted to supersede.

Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just been drinking and taking some
lunch, came up to them in his uniform of a gentleman of the
bedchamber, wiping his lips with a perfumed handkerchief of
bordered batiste.

"We are placing our forces," he said, pulling out his whiskers,
"Sergey Ivanovitch!"

And listening to the conversation, he supported Sviazhsky's
contention.

"One district's enough, and Sviazhsky's obviously of the
opposition," he said, words evidently intelligible to all except
Levin.

"Why, Kostya, you here too!  I suppose you're converted, eh?" he
added, turning to Levin and drawing his arm through his.  Levin
would have been glad indeed to be converted, but could not make
out what the point was, and retreating a few steps from the
speakers, he explained to Stepan Arkadyevitch his inability to
understand why the marshal of the province should be asked to
stand.

_"O sancta simplicitas!"_ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and briefly and
clearly he explained it to Levin.  If, as at previous elections,
all the districts asked the marshal of the province to stand,
then he would be elected without a ballot.  That must not be.
Now eight districts had agreed to call upon him: if two refused
to do so, Snetkov might decline to stand at all; and then the old
party might choose another of their party, which would throw them
completely out in their reckoning.  But if only one district,
Sviazhsky's, did not call upon him to stand, Snetkov would let
himself be balloted for.  They were even, some of them, going to
vote for him, and purposely to let him get a good many votes, so
that the enemy might be thrown off the scent, and when a
candidate of the other side was put up, they too might give him
some votes.  Levin understood to some extent, but not fully, and
would have put a few more questions, when suddenly everyone
began talking and making a noise and they moved towards the big
room.

"What is it? eh? whom?" "No guarantee? whose? what?" "They won't
pass him?" "No guarantee?" "They won't let Flerov in?" "Eh,
because of the charge against him?" "Why, at this rate, they
won't admit anyone.  It's a swindle!" "The law!" Levin heard
exclamations on all sides, and he moved into the big room
together with the others, all hurrying somewhere and afraid of
missing something.  Squeezed by the crowding noblemen, he drew
near the high table where the marshal of the province, Sviazhsky,
and the other leaders were hotly disputing about something.



Chapter 28


Levin was standing rather far off.  A nobleman breathing heavily
and hoarsely at his side, and another whose thick boots were
creaking, prevented him from hearing distinctly.  He could only
hear the soft voice of the marshal faintly, then the shrill voice
of the malignant gentleman, and then the voice of Sviazhsky.
They were disputing, as far as he could make out, as to the
interpretation to be put on the act and the exact meaning of the
words: "liable to be called up for trial."

The crowd parted to make way for Sergey Ivanovitch approaching
the table.  Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till the malignant
gentleman had finished speaking, said that he thought the best
solution would be to refer to the act itself, and asked the
secretary to find the act.  The act said that in case of
difference of opinion, there must be a ballot.

Sergey Ivanovitch read the act and began to explain its meaning,
but at that point a tall, stout, round-shouldered landowner, with
dyed whiskers, in a tight uniform that cut the back of his neck,
interrupted him.  He went up to the table, and striking it with
his finger ring, he shouted loudly: "A ballot!  Put it to the
vote!  No need for more talking!"  Then several voices began to
talk all at once, and the tall nobleman with the ring, getting
more and more exasperated, shouted more and more loudly.  But it
was impossible to make out what he said.

He was shouting for the very course Sergey Ivanovitch had
proposed; but it was evident that he hated him and all his party,
and this feeling of hatred spread through the whole party and
roused in opposition to it the same vindictiveness, though in a
more seemly form, on the other side.  Shouts were raised, and for
a moment all was confusion, so that the marshal of the province
had to call for order.

"A ballot!  A ballot!  Every nobleman sees it!  We shed our blood
for our country!...  The confidence of the monarch....  No
checking the accounts of the marshal; he's not a cashier....  But
that's not the point....  Votes, please!  Beastly!..." shouted
furious and violent voices on all sides.  Looks and faces were
even more violent and furious than their words.  They expressed
the most implacable hatred.  Levin did not in the least
understand what was the matter, and he marveled at the passion
with which it was disputed whether or not the decision about
Flerov should be put to the vote.  He forgot, as Sergey
Ivanovitch explained to him afterwards, this syllogism: that it
was necessary for the public good to get rid of the marshal of
the province; that to get rid of the marshal it was necessary to
have a majority of votes; that to get a majority of votes it was
necessary to secure Flerov's right to vote; that to secure the
recognition of Flerov's right to vote they must decide on the
interpretation to be put on the act.

"And one vote may decide the whole question, and one must be
serious and consecutive, if one wants to be of use in public
life," concluded Sergey Ivanovitch.  But Levin forgot all that,
and it was painful to him to see all these excellent persons, for
whom he had a respect, in such an unpleasant and vicious state of
excitement.  To escape from this painful feeling he went away
into the other room where there was nobody except the waiters at
the refreshment bar.  Seeing the waiters busy over washing up the
crockery and setting in order their plates and wine glasses,
seeing their calm and cheerful faces, Levin felt an unexpected
sense of relief as though he had come out of a stuffy room into
the fresh air.  He began walking up and down, looking with
pleasure at the waiters.  He particularly liked the way one
gray-whiskered waiter, who showed his scorn for the other younger
ones and was jeered at by them, was teaching them how to fold up
napkins properly.  Levin was just about to enter into
conversation with the old waiter, when the secretary of the court
of wardship, a little old man whose specialty it was to know all
the noblemen of the province by name and patronymic, drew him
away.

"Please come, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," he said, "your brother's
looking for you.  They are voting on the legal point."

Levin walked into the room, received a white ball, and followed
his brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, to the table where Sviazhsky was
standing with a significant and ironical face, holding his beard
in his fist and sniffing at it.  Sergey Ivanovitch put his hand
into the box, put the ball somewhere, and making room for Levin,
stopped.  Levin advanced, but utterly forgetting what he was to
do, and much embarrassed, he turned to Sergey Ivanovitch with the
question, "Where am I to put it?"  He asked this softly, at a
moment when there was talking going on near, so that he had hoped
his question would not be overheard.  But the persons speaking
paused, and his improper question was overheard.  Sergey
Ivanovitch frowned.

"That is a matter for each man's own decision," he said severely.

Several people smiled.  Levin crimsoned, hurriedly thrust his
hand under the cloth, and put the ball to the right as it was in
his right hand.  Having put it in, he recollected that he ought
to have thrust his left hand too, and so he thrust it in though
too late, and, still more overcome with confusion, he beat a
hasty retreat into the background.

"A hundred and twenty-six for admission! Ninety-eight against!"
sang out the voice of the secretary, who could not pronounce the
letter _r_.  Then there was a laugh; a button and two nuts were
found in the box.  The nobleman was allowed the right to vote,
and the new party had conquered.

But the old party did not consider themselves conquered.  Levin
heard that they were asking Snetkov to stand, and he saw that a
crowd of noblemen was surrounding the marshal, who was saying
something.  Levin went nearer.  In reply Snetkov spoke of the
trust the noblemen of the province had placed in him, the
affection they had shown him, which he did not deserve, as his
only merit had been his attachment to the nobility, to whom he
had devoted twelve years of service.  Several times he repeated
the words: "I have served to the best of my powers with truth and
good faith, I value your goodness and thank you," and suddenly he
stopped short from the tears that choked him, and went out of the
room.  Whether these tears came from a sense of the injustice
being done him, from his love for the nobility, or from the
strain of the position he was placed in, feeling himself
surrounded by enemies, his emotion infected the assembly, the
majority were touched, and Levin felt a tenderness for Snetkov.

In the doorway the marshal of the province jostled against Levin.

"Beg pardon, excuse me, please," he said as to a stranger, but
recognizing Levin, he smiled timidly.  It seemed to Levin that he
would have liked to say something, but could not speak for
emotion.  His face and his whole figure in his uniform with the
crosses, and white trousers striped with braid, as he moved
hurriedly along, reminded Levin of some hunted beast who sees
that he is in evil case.  This expression in the marshal's face
was particularly touching to Levin, because, only the day before,
he had been at his house about his trustee business and had seen
him in all his grandeur, a kind-hearted, fatherly man.  The big
house with the old family furniture; the rather dirty, far from
stylish, but respectful footmen, unmistakably old house serfs who
had stuck to their master; the stout, good-natured wife in a cap
with lace and a Turkish shawl, petting her pretty grandchild, her
daughter's daughter; the young son, a sixth form high school boy,
coming home from school, and greeting his father, kissing his big
hand; the genuine, cordial words and gestures of the old man--all
this had the day before roused an instinctive feeling of respect
and sympathy in Levin.  This old man was a touching and pathetic
figure to Levin now, and he longed to say something pleasant to
him.

"So you're sure to be our marshal again," he said.

"It's not likely," said the marshal, looking round with a scared
expression.  "I'm worn out, I'm old.  If there are men younger
and more deserving than I, let them serve."

And the marshal disappeared through a side door.

The most solemn moment was at hand.  They were to proceed
immediately to the election.  The leaders of both parties were
reckoning white and black on their fingers.

The discussion upon Flerov had given the new party not only
Flerov's vote, but had also gained time for them, so that they
could send to fetch three noblemen who had been rendered unable
to take part in the elections by the wiles of the other party.
Two noble gentlemen, who had a weakness for strong drink, had
been made drunk by the partisans of Snetkov, and a third had been
robbed of his uniform.

On learning this, the new party had made haste, during the
dispute about Flerov, to send some of their men in a sledge to
clothe the stripped gentleman, and to bring along one of the
intoxicated to the meeting.

"I've brought one, drenched him with water," said the landowner,
who had gone on this errand, to Sviazhsky.  "He's all right?
he'll do."

"Not too drunk, he won't fall down?" said Sviazhsky, shaking his
head.

"No, he's first-rate.  If only they don't give him any more
here....  I've told the waiter not to give him anything on any
account."



Chapter 29


The narrow room, in which they were smoking and taking refreshments,
was full of noblemen.  The excitement grew more intense,
and every face betrayed some uneasiness.  The excitement was
specially keen for the leaders of each party, who knew every
detail, and had reckoned up every vote.  They were the generals
organizing the approaching battle.  The rest, like the rank and
file before an engagement, though they were getting ready for the
fight, sought for other distractions in the interval.  Some were
lunching, standing at the bar, or sitting at the table; others
were walking up and down the long room, smoking cigarettes, and
talking with friends whom they had not seen for a long while.

Levin did not care to eat, and he was not smoking; he did not
want to join his own friends, that is Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan
Arkadyevitch, Sviazhsky and the rest, because Vronsky in his
equerry's uniform was standing with them in eager conversation.
Levin had seen him already at the meeting on the previous day,
and he had studiously avoided him, not caring to greet him.  He
went to the window and sat down, scanning the groups, and
listening to what was being said around him.  He felt depressed,
especially because everyone else was, as he saw, eager, anxious,
and interested, and he alone, with an old, toothless little man
with mumbling lips wearing a naval uniform, sitting beside him,
had no interest in it and nothing to do.

"He's such a blackguard!  I have told him so, but it makes no
difference.  Only think of it!  He couldn't collect it in three
years!" he heard vigorously uttered by a round-shouldered, short,
country gentleman, who had pomaded hair hanging on his
embroidered collar, and new boots obviously put on for the
occasion, with heels that tapped energetically as he spoke.
Casting a displeased glance at Levin, this gentleman sharply
turned his back.

"Yes, it's a dirty business, there's no denying," a small
gentleman assented in a high voice.

Next, a whole crowd of country gentlemen, surrounding a stout
general, hurriedly came near Levin.  These persons were
unmistakably seeking a place where they could talk without being
overheard.

"How dare he say I had his breeches stolen!  Pawned them for
drink, I expect.  Damn the fellow, prince indeed!  He'd better
not say it, the beast!"

"But excuse me!  They take their stand on the act," was being
said in another group; "the wife must be registered as noble."

"Oh, damn your acts!  I speak from my heart.  We're all
gentlemen, aren't we?  Above suspicion."

"Shall we go on, your excellency, _fine champagne?_"

Another group was following a nobleman, who was shouting
something in a loud voice; it was one of the three intoxicated
gentlemen.

"I always advised Marya Semyonovna to let for a fair rent, for
she can never save a profit," he heard a pleasant voice say.  The
speaker was a country gentleman with gray whiskers, wearing the
regimental uniform of an old general staff-officer.  It was the
very landowner Levin had met at Sviazhsky's.  He knew him at
once.  The landowner too stared at Levin, and they exchanged
greetings.

"Very glad to see you!  To be sure!  I remember you very well.
Last year at our district marshal, Nikolay Ivanovitch's."

"Well, and how is your land doing?" asked Levin.

"Oh, still just the same, always at a loss," the landowner
answered with a resigned smile, but with an expression of
serenity and conviction that so it must be.  "And how do you come
to be in our province?" he asked.  "Come to take part in our _coup
d'etat?_" he said, confidently pronouncing the French words with a
bad accent.  "All Russia's here--gentlemen of the bedchamber,
and everything short of the ministry."  He pointed to the
imposing figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch in white trousers and his
court uniform, walking by with a general.

"I ought to own that I don't very well understand the drift of
the provincial elections," said Levin.

The landowner looked at him.

"Why, what is there to understand?  There's no meaning in it at
all.  It's a decaying institution that goes on running only by
the force of inertia.  Just look, the very uniforms tell you that
it's an assembly of justices of the peace, permanent members of
the court, and so on, but not of noblemen."

"Then why do you come?" asked Levin.

"From habit, nothing else.  Then, too, one must keep up
connections.  It's a moral obligation of a sort.  And then, to
tell the truth, there's one's own interests.  My son-in-law wants
to stand as a permanent member; they're not rich people, and he
must be brought forward.  These gentlemen, now, what do they come
for?" he said, pointing to the malignant gentleman, who was
talking at the high table.

"That's the new generation of nobility."

"New it may be, but nobility it isn't.  They're proprietors of a
sort, but we're the landowners.  As noblemen, they're cutting
their own throats."

"But you say it's an institution that's served its time."

"That it may be, but still it ought to be treated a little more
respectfully.  Snetkov, now...We may be of use, or we may not,
but we're the growth of a thousand years.  If we're laying out a
garden, planning one before the house, you know, and there you've
a tree that's stood for centuries in the very spot....  Old and
gnarled it may be, and yet you don't cut down the old fellow to
make room for the flowerbeds, but lay out your beds so as to take
advantage of the tree.  You won't grow him again in a year," he
said cautiously, and he immediately changed the conversation.
"Well, and how is your land doing?"

"Oh, not very well.  I make five per cent."

"Yes, but you don't reckon your own work.  Aren't you worth
something too?  I'll tell you my own case.  Before I took to
seeing after the land, I had a salary of three hundred pounds
from the service.  Now I do more work than I did in the service,
and like you I get five per cent. on the land, and thank God for
that.  But one's work is thrown in for nothing."

"Then why do you do it, if it's a clear loss?"

"Oh, well, one does it!  What would you have?  It's habit, and
one knows it's how it should be.  And what's more," the landowner
went on, leaning his elbows on the window and chatting on, "my
son, I must tell you, has no taste for it.  There's no doubt
he'll be a scientific man.  So there'll be no one to keep it up.
And yet one does it.  Here this year I've planted an orchard."

"Yes, yes," said Levin, "that's perfectly true.  I always feel
there's no real balance of gain in my work on the land, and yet
one does it....  It's a sort of duty one feels to the land."

"But I tell you what," the landowner pursued; "a neighbor of
mine, a merchant, was at my place.  We walked about the fields
and the garden.  'No,' said he, 'Stepan Vassilievitch,
everything's well looked after, but your garden's neglected.'
But, as a fact, it's well kept up.  'To my thinking, I'd cut down
that lime-tree.  Here you've thousands of limes, and each would
make two good bundles of bark.  And nowadays that bark's worth
something.  I'd cut down the lot.'"

"And with what he made he'd increase his stock, or buy some land
for a trifle, and let it out in lots to the peasants," Levin
added, smiling.  He had evidently more than once come across
those commercial calculations.  "And he'd make his fortune.  But
you and I must thank God if we keep what we've got and leave it
to our children."

"You're married, I've heard?" said the landowner.

"Yes," Levin answered, with proud satisfaction.  "Yes, it's
rather strange," he went on.  "So we live without making
anything, as though we were ancient vestals set to keep in a
fire."

The landowner chuckled under his white mustaches.

"There are some among us, too, like our friend Nikolay
Ivanovitch, or Count Vronsky, that's settled here lately, who try
to carry on their husbandry as though it were a factory; but so
far it leads to nothing but making away with capital on it."

"But why is it we don't do like the merchants?  Why don't we cut
down our parks for timber?" said Levin, returning to a thought
that had struck him.

"Why, as you said, to keep the fire in.  Besides that's not work
for a nobleman.  And our work as noblemen isn't done here at the
elections, but yonder, each in our corner.  There's a class
instinct, too, of what one ought and oughtn't to do.  There's the
peasants, too, I wonder at them sometimes; any good peasant tries
to take all the land he can.  However bad the land is, he'll work
it.  Without a return too.  At a simple loss."

"Just as we do," said Levin.  "Very, very glad to have met you,"
he added, seeing Sviazhsky approaching him.

"And here we've met for the first time since we met at your
place," said the landowner to Sviazhsky, "and we've had a good
talk too."

"Well, have you been attacking the new order of things?" said
Sviazhsky with a smile.

"That we're bound to do."

"You've relieved your feelings?"



Chapter 30


Sviazhsky took Levin's arm, and went with him to his own friends.
This time there was no avoiding Vronsky.  He was standing with
Stepan Arkadyevitch and Sergey Ivanovitch, and looking straight
at Levin as he drew near.

"Delighted!  I believe I've had the pleasure of meeting you...at
Princess Shtcherbatskaya's," he said, giving Levin his hand.

"Yes, I quite remember our meeting," said Levin, and blushing
crimson, he turned away immediately, and began talking to his
brother.

With a slight smile Vronsky went on talking to Sviazhsky,
obviously without the slightest inclination to enter into
conversation with Levin.  But Levin, as he talked to his brother,
was continually looking round at Vronsky, trying to think of
something to say to him to gloss over his rudeness.

"What are we waiting for now?" asked Levin, looking at Sviazhsky
and Vronsky.

"For Snetkov.  He has to refuse or to consent to stand," answered
Sviazhsky.

"Well, and what has he done, consented or not?"

"That's the point, that he's done neither," said Vronsky.

"And if he refuses, who will stand then?" asked Levin, looking at
Vronsky.

"Whoever chooses to," said Sviazhsky.

"Shall you?" asked Levin.

"Certainly not I," said Sviazhsky, looking confused, and turning
an alarmed glance at the malignant gentleman, who was standing
beside Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Who then?  Nevyedovsky?" said Levin, feeling he was putting his
foot into it.

But this was worse still.  Nevyedovsky and Sviazhsky were the two
candidates.

"I certainly shall not, under any circumstances," answered the
malignant gentleman.

This was Nevyedovsky himself.  Sviazhsky introduced him to Levin.

"Well, you find it exciting too?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
winking at Vronsky.  "It's something like a race.  One might bet
on it."

"Yes, it is keenly exciting," said Vronsky.  "And once taking the
thing up, one's eager to see it through.  It's a fight!" he said,
scowling and setting his powerful jaws.

"What a capable fellow Sviazhsky is!  Sees it all so clearly."

"Oh, yes!" Vronsky assented indifferently.

A silence followed, during which Vronsky--since he had to look at
something--looked at Levin, at his feet, at his uniform, then at
his face, and noticing his gloomy eyes fixed upon him, he said,
in order to say something:

"How is it that you, living constantly in the country, are not a
justice of the peace?  You are not in the uniform of one."

"It's because I consider that the justice of the peace is a silly
institution," Levin answered gloomily.  He had been all the time
looking for an opportunity to enter into conversation with
Vronsky, so as to smooth over his rudeness at their first
meeting.

"I don't think so, quite the contrary," Vronsky said, with quiet
surprise.

"It's a plaything," Levin cut him short.  "We don't want justices
of the peace.  I've never had a single thing to do with them
during eight years.  And what I have had was decided wrongly by
them.  The justice of the peace is over thirty miles from me.
For some matter of two roubles I should have to send a lawyer,
who costs me fifteen."

And he related how a peasant had stolen some flour from the
miller, and when the miller told him of it, had lodged a
complaint for slander.  All this was utterly uncalled for and
stupid, and Levin felt it himself as he said it.

"Oh, this is such an original fellow!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch
with his most soothing, almond-oil smile.  "But come along; I
think they're voting...."

And they separated.

"I can't understand," said Sergey Ivanovitch, who had observed
his brother's clumsiness, "I can't understand how anyone can be
so absolutely devoid of political tact.  That's where we Russians
are so deficient.  The marshal of the province is our opponent,
and with him you're _ami cochon_, and you beg him to stand.  Count
Vronsky, now ...I'm not making a friend of him; he's asked me
to dinner, and I'm not going; but he's one of our side--why make
an enemy of him?  Then you ask Nevyedovsky if he's going to
stand.  That's not a thing to do."

"Oh, I don't understand it at all!  And it's all such nonsense,"
Levin answered gloomily.

"You say it's all such nonsense, but as soon as you have anything
to do with it, you make a muddle."

Levin did not answer, and they walked together into the big room.

The marshal of the province, though he was vaguely conscious in
the air of some trap being prepared for him, and though he had
not been called upon by all to stand, had still made up his mind
to stand.  All was silence in the room.  The secretary announced
in a loud voice that the captain of the guards, Mihail
Stepanovitch Snetkov, would now be balloted for as marshal of the
province.

The district marshals walked carrying plates, on which were
balls, from their tables to the high table, and the election
began.

"Put it in the right side," whispered Stepan Arkadyevitch, as
with his brother Levin followed the marshal of his district to
the table.  But Levin had forgotten by now the calculations that
had been explained to him, and was afraid Stepan Arkadyevitch
might be mistaken in saying "the right side." Surely Snetkov was
the enemy.  As he went up, he held the ball in his right hand,
but thinking he was wrong, just at the box he changed to the left
hand, and undoubtedly put the ball to the left.  An adept in the
business, standing at the box and seeing by the mere action of
the elbow where each put his ball, scowled with annoyance.  It
was no good for him to use his insight.

Everything was still, and the counting of the balls was heard.
Then a single voice rose and proclaimed the numbers for and
against.  The marshal had been voted for by a considerable
majority.  All was noise and eager movement towards the doors.
Snetkov came in, and the nobles thronged round him,
congratulating him.

"Well, now is it over?" Levin asked Sergey Ivanovitch.

"It's only just beginning," Sviazhsky said, replying for Sergey
Ivanovitch with a smile.  "Some other candidate may receive more
votes than the marshal."

Levin had quite forgotten about that.  Now he could only remember
that there was some sort of trickery in it, but he was too bored
to think what it was exactly.  He felt depressed, and longed to
get out of the crowd.

As no one was paying any attention to him, and no one apparently
needed him, he quietly slipped away into the little room where
the refreshments were, and again had a great sense of comfort
when he saw the waiters.  The little old waiter pressed him to
have something, and Levin agreed.  After eating a cutlet with
beans and talking to the waiters of their former masters, Levin,
not wishing to go back to the hall, where it was all so
distasteful to him, proceeded to walk through the galleries.  The
galleries were full of fashionably dressed ladies, leaning over
the balustrade and trying not to lose a single word of what was
being said below.  With the ladies were sitting and standing
smart lawyers, high school teachers in spectacles, and officers.
Everywhere they were talking of the election, and of how worried
the marshal was, and how splendid the discussions had been.  In
one group Levin heard his brother's praises.  One lady was
telling a lawyer:

"How glad I am I heard Koznishev!  It's worth losing one's
dinner. He's exquisite!  So clear and distinct all of it!
There's not one of you in the law courts that speaks like that.
The only one is Meidel, and he's not so eloquent by a long way."

Finding a free place, Levin leaned over the balustrade and began
looking and listening.

All the noblemen were sitting railed off behind barriers
according to their districts.  In the middle of the room stood a
man in a uniform, who shouted in a loud, high voice:

"As a candidate for the marshalship of the nobility of the
province we call upon staff-captain Yevgeney Ivanovitch Apuhtin!"
A dead silence followed, and then a weak old voice was heard:
"Declined!"

"We call upon the privy councilor Pyotr Petrovitch Bol," the
voice began again.

"Declined!" a high boyish voice replied.

Again it began, and again "Declined." And so it went on for about
an hour.  Levin, with his elbows on the balustrade, looked and
listened.  At first he wondered and wanted to know what it meant;
then feeling sure that he could not make it out he began to be
bored.  Then recalling all the excitement and vindictiveness he
had seen on all the faces, he felt sad; he made up his mind to
go, and went downstairs.  As he passed through the entry to the
galleries he met a dejected high school boy walking up and down
with tired-looking eyes.  On the stairs he met a couple--a lady
running quickly on her high heels and the jaunty deputy
prosecutor.

"I told you you weren't late," the deputy prosecutor was saying
at the moment when Levin moved aside to let the lady pass.

Levin was on the stairs to the way out, and was just feeling in
his waistcoat pocket for the number of his overcoat, when the
secretary overtook him.

"This way, please, Konstantin Dmitrievitch; they are voting."

The candidate who was being voted on was Nevyedovsky, who had so
stoutly denied all idea of standing.  Levin went up to the door
of the room; it was locked.  The secretary knocked, the door
opened, and Levin was met by two red-faced gentlemen, who darted
out.

"I can't stand any more of it," said one red-faced gentleman.

After them the face of the marshal of the province was poked out.
His face was dreadful-looking from exhaustion and dismay.

"I told you not to let any one out!" he cried to the doorkeeper.

"I let someone in, your excellency!"

"Mercy on us!" and with a heavy sigh the marshal of the province
walked with downcast head to the high table in the middle of the
room, his legs staggering in his white trousers.

Nevyedovsky had scored a higher majority, as they had planned,
and he was the new marshal of the province.  Many people were
amused, many were pleased and happy, many were in ecstasies, many
were disgusted and unhappy.  The former marshal of the province
was in a state of despair, which he could not conceal.  When
Nevyedovsky went out of the room, the crowd thronged round him
and followed him enthusiastically, just as they had followed the
governor who had opened the meetings, and just as they had
followed Snetkov when he was elected.



Chapter 31


The newly elected marshal and many of the successful party dined
that day with Vronsky.

Vronsky had come to the elections partly because he was bored in
the country and wanted to show Anna his right to independence,
and also to repay Sviazhsky by his support at the election for
all the trouble he had taken for Vronsky at the district council
election, but chiefly in order strictly to perform all those
duties of a nobleman and landowner which he had taken upon
himself.  But he had not in the least expected that the election
would so interest him, so keenly excite him, and that he would be
so good at this kind of thing.  He was quite a new man in the
circle of the nobility of the province, but his success was
unmistakable, and he was not wrong in supposing that he had
already obtained a certain influence.  This influence was due to
his wealth and reputation, the capital house in the town lent him
by his old friend Shirkov, who had a post in the department of
finances and was director of a flourishing bank in Kashin; the
excellent cook Vronsky had brought from the country, and his
friendship with the governor, who was a schoolfellow of
Vronsky's--a schoolfellow he had patronized and protected indeed.
But what contributed more than all to his success was his direct,
equable manner with everyone, which very quickly made the
majority of the noblemen reverse the current opinion of his
supposed haughtiness.  He was himself conscious that, except that
whimsical gentleman married to Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, who had _à
propos de bottes_ poured out a stream of irrelevant absurdities
with such spiteful fury, every nobleman with whom he had made
acquaintance had become his adherent.  He saw clearly, and other
people recognized it, too, that he had done a great deal to
secure the success of Nevyedovsky.  And now at his own table,
celebrating Nevyedovsky's election, he was experiencing an
agreeable sense of triumph over the success of his candidate.
The election itself had so fascinated him that, if he could
succeed in getting married during the next three years, he began
to think of standing himself--much as after winning a race ridden
by a jockey, he had longed to ride a race himself.

Today he was celebrating the success of his jockey.  Vronsky sat
at the head of the table, on his right hand sat the young
governor, a general of high rank.  To all the rest he was the
chief man in the province, who had solemnly opened the elections
with his speech, and aroused a feeling of respect and even of awe
in many people, as Vronsky saw; to Vronsky he was little Katka
Maslov--that had been his nickname in the Pages' Corps--whom he
felt to be shy and tried to _mettre à son aise_.  On the left hand
sat Nevyedovsky with his youthful, stubborn, and malignant face.
With him Vronsky was simple and deferential.

Sviazhsky took his failure very light-heartedly.  It was indeed
no failure in his eyes, as he said himself, turning, glass in
hand, to Nevyedovsky; they could not have found a better
representative of the new movement, which the nobility ought to
follow.  And so every honest person, as he said, was on the side
of today's success and was rejoicing over  it.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was glad, too, that he was having a good
time, and that everyone was pleased.  The episode of the
elections served as a good occasion for a capital dinner.
Sviazhsky comically imitated the tearful discourse of the
marshal, and observed, addressing Nevyedovsky, that his
excellency would have to select another more complicated method
of auditing the accounts than tears.  Another nobleman jocosely
described how footmen in stockings had been ordered for the
marshal's ball, and how now they would have to be sent back
unless the new marshal would give a ball with footmen in
stockings.

Continually during dinner they said of Nevyedovsky:  "our
marshal," and "your excellency."

This was said with the same pleasure with which a bride is called
"Madame" and her husband's name.  Nevyedovsky affected to be not
merely indifferent but scornful of this appellation, but it was
obvious that he was highly delighted, and had to keep a curb on
himself not to betray the triumph which was unsuitable to their
new liberal tone.

After dinner several telegrams were sent to people interested in
the result of the election.  And Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was in
high good humor, sent Darya Alexandrovna a telegram: "Nevyedovsky
elected by twenty votes.  Congratulations.  Tell people."  He
dictated it aloud, saying: "We must let them share our
rejoicing."  Darya Alexandrovna, getting the message, simply
sighed over the rouble wasted on it, and understood that it was
an after-dinner affair.  She knew Stiva had a weakness after
dining for _faire jouer le télégraphe._

Everything, together with the excellent dinner and the wine, not
from Russian merchants, but imported direct from abroad, was
extremely dignified, simple, and enjoyable.  The party--some
twenty--had been selected by Sviazhsky from among the more active
new liberals, all of the same way of thinking, who were at the
same time clever and well bred.  They drank, also half in jest,
to the health of the new marshal of the province, of the
governor, of the bank director, and of "our amiable host."

Vronsky was satisfied.  He had never expected to find so pleasant
a tone in the provinces.

Towards the end of dinner it was still more lively.  The governor
asked Vronsky to come to a concert for the benefit of the
Servians which his wife, who was anxious to make his
acquaintance, had been getting up.

"There'll be a ball, and you'll see the belle of the province.
Worth seeing, really."

"Not in my line," Vronsky answered.  He liked that English
phrase.  But he smiled, and promised to come.

Before they rose from the table, when all of them were smoking,
Vronsky's valet went up to him with a letter on a tray.

"From Vozdvizhenskoe by special messenger," he said with a
significant expression.

"Astonishing! how like he is to the deputy prosecutor
Sventitsky," said one of the guests in French of the valet, while
Vronsky, frowning, read the letter.

The letter was from Anna.  Before he read the letter, he knew its
contents.  Expecting the elections to be over in five days, he
had promised to be back on Friday.  Today was Saturday, and he
knew that the letter contained reproaches for not being back at
the time fixed.  The letter he had sent the previous evening had
probably not reached her yet.

The letter was what he had expected, but the form of it was
unexpected, and particularly disagreeable to him.  "Annie is very
ill, the doctor says it may be inflammation.  I am losing my
head all alone.  Princess Varvara is no help, but a hindrance.  I
expected you the day before yesterday, and yesterday, and now I
am sending to find out where you are and what you are doing.  I
wanted to come myself, but thought better of it, knowing you
would dislike it.  Send some answer, that I may know what to
do."

The child ill, yet she had thought of coming herself.  Their
daughter ill, and this hostile tone.

The innocent festivities over the election, and this gloomy,
burdensome love to which he had to return struck Vronsky by their
contrast.  But he had to go, and by the first train that night he
set off home.



Chapter 32


Before Vronsky's departure for the elections, Anna had reflected
that the scenes constantly repeated between them each time he
left home, might only make him cold to her instead of attaching
him to her, and resolved to do all she could to control herself
so as to bear the parting with composure.  But the cold, severe
glance with which he had looked at her when he came to tell her
he was going had wounded her, and before he had started her peace
of mind was destroyed.

In solitude afterwards, thinking over that glance which had
expressed his right to freedom, she came, as she always did, to
the same point--the sense of her own humiliation.  "He has the
right to go away when and where he chooses.  Not simply to go
away, but to leave me.  He has every right, and I have none.
But knowing that, he ought not to do it.  What has he done,
though?...  He looked at me with a cold, severe expression.  Of
course that is something indefinable, impalpable, but it has
never been so before, and that glance means a great deal," she
thought.  "That glance shows the beginning of indifference."

And though she felt sure that a coldness was beginning, there was
nothing she could do, she could not in any way alter her
relations to him.  Just as before, only by love and by charm
could she keep him.  And so, just as before, only by occupation
in the day, by morphine at night, could she stifle the fearful
thought of what would be if he ceased to love her.  It is true
there was still one means; not to keep him--for that she wanted
nothing more than his love--but to be nearer to him, to be in
such a position that he would not leave her.  That means was
divorce and marriage.  And she began to long for that, and made
up her mind to agree to it the first time he or Stiva approached
her on the subject.

Absorbed in such thoughts, she passed five days without him, the
five days that he was to be at the elections.

Walks, conversation with Princess Varvara, visits to the
hospital, and, most of all, reading--reading of one book after
another--filled up her time.  But on the sixth day, when the
coachman came back without him, she felt that now she was utterly
incapable of stifling the thought of him and of what he was doing
there, just at that time her little girl was taken ill.  Anna
began to look after her, but even that did not distract her mind,
especially as the illness was not serious.  However hard she
tried, she could not love this little child, and to feign love
was beyond her powers.  Towards the evening of that day, still
alone, Anna was in such a panic about him that she decided to
start for the town, but on second thoughts wrote him the
contradictory letter that Vronsky received, and without reading
it through, sent it off by a special messenger.  The next morning
she received his letter and regretted her own.  She dreaded a
repetition of the severe look he had flung at her at parting,
especially when he knew that the baby was not dangerously ill.
But still she was glad she had written to him.  At this moment
Anna was positively admitting to herself that she was a burden to
him, that he would relinquish his freedom regretfully to return
to her, and in spite of that she was glad he was coming.  Let him
weary of her, but he would be here with her, so that she would
see him, would know of every action he took.

She was sitting in the drawing room near a lamp, with a new
volume of Taine, and as she read, listening to the sound of the
wind outside, and every minute expecting the carriage to arrive.
Several times she had fancied she heard the sound of wheels, but
she had been mistaken.  At last she heard not the sound of
wheels, but the coachman's shout and the dull rumble in the
covered entry.  Even Princess Varvara, playing patience,
confirmed this, and Anna, flushing hotly, got up; but instead of
going down, as she had done twice before, she stood still.  She
suddenly felt ashamed of her duplicity, but even more she dreaded
how he might meet her.  All feeling of wounded pride had passed
now; she was only afraid of the expression of his displeasure.
She remembered that her child had been perfectly well again for
the last two days.  She felt positively vexed with her for
getting better from the very moment her letter was sent off.
Then she thought of him, that he was here, all of him, with his
hands, his eyes.  She heard his voice.  And forgetting
everything, she ran joyfully to meet him.

"Well, how is Annie?" he said timidly from below, looking up to
Anna as she ran down to him.

He was sitting on a chair, and a footman was pulling off his warm
over-boot.

"Oh, she is better."

"And you?" he said, shaking himself.

She took his hand in both of hers, and drew it to her waist,
never taking her eyes off him.

"Well, I'm glad," he said, coldly scanning her, her hair, her
dress, which he knew she had put on for him.  All was charming,
but how many times it had charmed him!  And the stern, stony
expression that she so dreaded settled upon his face.

"Well, I'm glad.  And are you well?" he said, wiping his damp
beard with his handkerchief and kissing her hand.

"Never mind," she thought, "only let him be here, and so long as
he's here he cannot, he dare not, cease to love me."

The evening was spent happily and gaily in the presence of
Princess Varvara, who complained to him that Anna had been taking
morphine in his absence.

"What am I to do?  I couldn't sleep....  My thoughts prevented
me.  When he's here I never take it--hardly ever."

He told her about the election, and Anna knew how by adroit
questions to bring him to what gave him most pleasure--his own
success.  She told him of everything that interested him at home;
and all that she told him was of the most cheerful description.

But late in the evening, when they were alone, Anna, seeing that
she had regained complete possession of him, wanted to erase the
painful impression of the glance he had given her for her letter.
She said:

"Tell me frankly, you were vexed at getting my letter, and you
didn't believe me?"

As soon as she had said it, she felt that however warm his
feelings were to her, he had not forgiven her for that.

"Yes," he said, "the letter was so strange.  First, Annie ill,
and then you thought of coming yourself."

"It was all the truth."

"Oh, I don't doubt it."

"Yes, you do doubt it.  You are vexed, I see."

"Not for one moment.  I'm only vexed, that's true, that you seem
somehow unwilling to admit that there are duties..."

"The duty of going to a concert..."

"But we won't talk about it," he said.

"Why not talk about it?" she said.

"I only meant to say that matters of real importance may turn up.
Now, for instance, I shall have to go to Moscow to arrange about
the house....  Oh, Anna, why are you so irritable?  Don't you
know that I can't live without you?"

"If so," said Anna, her voice suddenly changing, "it means that
you are sick of this life....  Yes, you will come for a day and
go away, as men do..."

"Anna, that's cruel.  I am ready to give up my whole life."

But she did not hear him.

"If you go to Moscow, I will go too.  I will not stay here.
Either we must separate or else live together."

"Why, you know, that's my one desire.  But for that..."

"We must get a divorce.  I will write to him.  I see I cannot go
on like this....  But I will come with you to Moscow."

"You talk as if you were threatening me.  But I desire nothing
so much as never to be parted from you," said Vronsky, smiling.

But as he said these words there gleamed in his eyes not merely a
cold look, but the vindictive look of a man persecuted and made
cruel.

She saw the look and correctly divined its meaning.

"If so, it's a calamity!" that glance told her.  It was a
moment's impression, but she never forgot it.

Anna wrote to her husband asking him about a divorce, and towards
the end of November, taking leave of Princess Varvara, who wanted
to go to Petersburg, she went with Vronsky to Moscow.  Expecting
every day an answer from Alexey Alexandrovitch, and after that
the divorce, they now established themselves together like
married people.





PART 7



Chapter 1


The Levins had been three months in Moscow.  The date had long
passed on which, according to the most trustworthy calculations
of people learned in such matters, Kitty should have been
confined.  But she was still about, and there was nothing to show
that her time was any nearer than two months ago.  The doctor,
the monthly nurse, and Dolly and her mother, and most of all
Levin, who could not think of the approaching event without
terror, began to be impatient and uneasy.  Kitty was the only
person who felt perfectly calm and happy.

She was distinctly conscious now of the birth of a new feeling of
love for the future child, for her to some extent actually
existing already, and she brooded blissfully over this feeling.
He was not by now altogether a part of herself, but sometimes
lived his own life independently of her.  Often this separate
being gave her pain, but at the same time she wanted to laugh
with a strange new joy.

All the people she loved were with her, and all were so good to
her, so attentively caring for her, so entirely pleasant was
everything presented to her, that if she had not known and felt
that it must all soon be over, she could not have wished for a
better and pleasanter life.  The only thing that spoiled the
charm of this manner of life was that her husband was not here as
she loved him to be, and as he was in the country.

She liked his serene, friendly, and hospitable manner in the
country.  In the town he seemed continually uneasy and on his
guard, as though he were afraid someone would be rude to him, and
still more to her.  At home in the country, knowing himself
distinctly to be in his right place, he was never in haste to be
off elsewhere.  He was never unoccupied.  Here in town he was in
a continual hurry, as though afraid of missing something, and yet
he had nothing to do.  And she felt sorry for him.  To others,
she knew, he did not appear an object of pity.  On the contrary,
when Kitty looked at him in society, as one sometimes looks at
those one loves, trying to see him as if he were a stranger, so
as to catch the impression he must make on others, she saw with a
panic even of jealous fear that he was far indeed from being a
pitiable figure, that he was very attractive with his fine
breeding, his rather old-fashioned, reserved courtesy with women,
his powerful figure, and striking, as she thought, and expressive
face.  But she saw him not from without, but from within; she saw
that here he was not himself; that was the only way she could
define his condition to herself.  Sometimes she inwardly
reproached him for his inability to live in the town; sometimes
she recognized that it was really hard for him to order his life
here so that he could be satisfied with it.

What had he to do, indeed?  He did not care for cards; he did not
go to a club.  Spending the time with jovial gentlemen of
Oblonsky's type--she knew now what that meant...it meant drinking
and going somewhere after drinking.  She could not think without
horror of where men went on such occasions.  Was he to go into
society?  But she knew he could only find satisfaction in that if
he took pleasure in the society of young women, and that she
could not wish for.  Should he stay at home with her, her mother
and her sisters?  But much as she liked and enjoyed their
conversations forever on the same subjects--"Aline-Nadine," as
the old prince called the sisters' talks--she knew it must bore
him.  What was there left for him to do?  To go on writing at his
book he had indeed attempted, and at first he used to go to the
library and make extracts and look up references for his book.
But, as he told her, the more he did nothing, the less time he
had to do anything.  And besides, he complained that he had
talked too much about his book here, and that consequently all
his ideas about it were muddled and had lost their interest for
him.

One advantage in this town life was that quarrels hardly ever
happened between them here in town.  Whether it was that their
conditions were different, or that they had both become more
careful and sensible in that respect, they had no quarrels in
Moscow from jealousy, which they had so dreaded when they moved
from the country.

One event, an event of great importance to both from that point
of view, did indeed happen--that was Kitty's meeting with
Vronsky.

The old Princess Marya Borissovna, Kitty's godmother, who had
always been very fond of her, had insisted on seeing her.  Kitty,
though she did not go into society at all on account of her
condition, went with her father to see the venerable old lady,
and there met Vronsky.

The only thing Kitty could reproach herself for at this meeting
was that at the instant when she recognized in his civilian dress
the features once so familiar to her, her breath failed her, the
blood rushed to her heart, and a vivid blush--she felt it--
overspread her face.  But this lasted only a few seconds.  Before
her father, who purposely began talking in a loud voice to
Vronsky, had finished, she was perfectly ready to look at
Vronsky, to speak to him, if necessary, exactly as she spoke to
Princess Marya Borissovna, and more than that, to do so in such a
way that everything to the faintest intonation and smile would
have been approved by her husband, whose unseen presence she
seemed to feel about her at that instant.

She said a few words to him, even smiled serenely at his joke
about the elections, which he called "our parliament." (She had
to smile to show she saw the joke.) But she turned away
immediately to Princess Marya Borissovna, and did not once glance
at him till he got up to go; then she looked at him, but
evidently only because it would be uncivil not to look at a man
when he is saying good-bye.

She was grateful to her father for saying nothing to her about
their meeting Vronsky, but she saw by his special warmth to her
after the visit during their usual walk that he was pleased with
her.  She was pleased with herself.  She had not expected she
would have had the power, while keeping somewhere in the bottom
of her heart all the memories of her old feeling for Vronsky, not
only to seem but to be perfectly indifferent and composed with
him.

Levin flushed a great deal more than she when she told him she
had met Vronsky at Princess Marya Borissovna's.  It was very hard
for her to tell him this, but still harder to go on speaking of
the details of the meeting, as he did not question her, but
simply gazed at her with a frown.

"I am very sorry you weren't there," she said.  "Not that you
weren't in the room...I couldn't have been so natural in your
presence...I am blushing now much more, much, much more," she
said, blushing till the tears came into her eyes.  "But that you
couldn't see through a crack."

The truthful eyes told Levin that she was satisfied with herself,
and in spite of her blushing he was quickly reassured and began
questioning her, which was all she wanted.  When he had heard
everything, even to the detail that for the first second she
could not help flushing, but that afterwards she was just as
direct and as much at her ease as with any chance acquaintance,
Levin was quite happy again and said he was glad of it, and would
not now behave as stupidly as he had done at the election, but
would try the first time he met Vronsky to be as friendly as
possible.

"It's so wretched to feel that there's a man almost an enemy whom
it's painful to meet," said Levin.  "I'm very, very glad."



Chapter 2


"Go, please, go then and call on the Bols," Kitty said to her
husband, when he came in to see her at eleven o'clock before
going out.  "I know you are dining at the club; papa put down
your name.  But what are you going to do in the morning?"

"I am only going to Katavasov," answered Levin.

"Why so early?"

"He promised to introduce me to Metrov.  I wanted to talk to him
about my work.  He's a distinguished scientific man from
Petersburg," said Levin.

"Yes; wasn't it his article you were praising so?  Well, and
after that?" said Kitty.

"I shall go to the court, perhaps, about my sister's business."

"And the concert?" she queried.

"I shan't go there all alone."

"No? do go; there are going to be some new things....  That
interested you so.  I should certainly go."

"Well, anyway, I shall come home before dinner," he said, looking
at his watch.

"Put on your frock coat, so that you can go straight to call on
Countess Bola."

"But is it absolutely necessary?"

"Oh, absolutely!  He has been to see us.  Come, what is it?  You
go in, sit down, talk for five minutes of the weather, get up and
go away."

"Oh, you wouldn't believe it!  I've got so out of the way of all
this that it makes me feel positively ashamed.  It's such a
horrible thing to do!  A complete outsider walks in, sits down,
stays on with nothing to do, wastes their time and worries
himself, and walks away!"

Kitty laughed.

"Why, I suppose you used to pay calls before you were married,
didn't you?"

"Yes, I did, but I always felt ashamed, and now I'm so out of the
way of it that, by Jove! I'd sooner go two days running without
my dinner than pay this call!  One's so ashamed!  I feel all the
while that they're annoyed, that they're saying, 'What has he
come for?'"

"No, they won't.  I'll answer for that," said Kitty, looking into
his face with a laugh.  She took his hand.  "Well, good-bye....
Do go, please."

He was just going out after kissing his wife's hand, when she
stopped him.

"Kostya, do you know I've only fifty roubles left?"

"Oh, all right, I'll go to the bank and get some.  How much?" he
said, with the expression of dissatisfaction she knew so well.

"No, wait a minute."  She held his hand.  "Let's talk about it,
it worries me.  I seem to spend nothing unnecessary, but money
seems to fly away simply.  We don't manage well, somehow."

"Oh, it's all right," he said with a little cough, looking at her
from under his brows.

That cough she knew well.  It was a sign of intense
dissatisfaction, not with her, but with himself.  He certainly
was displeased not at so much money being spent, but at being
reminded of what he, knowing something was unsatisfactory, wanted
to forget.

"I have told Sokolov to sell the wheat, and to borrow an advance
on the mill.  We shall have money enough in any case."

"Yes, but I'm afraid that altogether..."

"Oh, it's all right, all right," he repeated.  "Well, good-bye,
darling."

"No, I'm really sorry sometimes that I listened to mamma.  How
nice it would have been in the country!  As it is, I'm worrying
you all, and we're wasting our money."

"Not at all, not at all.  Not once since I've been married have
I said that things could have been better than they are...."

"Truly?" she said, looking into his eyes.

He had said it without thinking, simply to console her.  But when
he glanced at her and saw those sweet truthful eyes fastened
questioningly on him, he repeated it with his whole heart.  "I
was positively forgetting her," he thought.  And he remembered
what was before them, so soon to come.

"Will it be soon?  How do you feel?" he whispered, taking her two
hands.

"I have so often thought so, that now I don't think about it or
know anything about it."

"And you're not frightened?"

She smiled contemptuously.

"Not the least little bit," she said.

"Well, if anything happens, I shall be at Katavasov's."

"No, nothing will happen, and don't think about it.  I'm going
for a walk on the boulevard with papa.  We're going to see Dolly.
I shall expect you before dinner.  Oh, yes!  Do you know that
Dolly's position is becoming utterly impossible?  She's in debt
all round; she hasn't a penny.  We were talking yesterday with
mamma and Arseny" (this was her sister's husband Lvov), "and we
determined to send you with him to talk to Stiva.  It's really
unbearable.  One can't speak to papa about it....  But if you and
he..."

"Why, what can we do?" said Levin.

"You'll be at Arseny's, anyway; talk to him, he will tell what we
decided."

"Oh, I agree to everything Arseny thinks beforehand.  I'll go and
see him.  By the way, if I do go to the concert, I'll go with
Natalia.  Well, good-bye."

On the steps Levin was stopped by his old servant Kouzma, who had
been with him before his marriage, and now looked after their
household in town.

"Beauty" (that was the left shaft-horse brought up from the
country) "has been badly shod and is quite lame," he said.  "What
does your honor wish to be done?"

During the first part of their stay in Moscow, Levin had used his
own horses brought up from the country.  He had tried to arrange
this part of their expenses in the best and cheapest way
possible; but it appeared that their own horses came dearer than
hired horses, and they still hired too.

"Send for the veterinary, there may be a bruise."

"And for Katerina Alexandrovna?" asked Kouzma.

Levin was not by now struck as he had been at first by the fact
that to get from one end of Moscow to the other he had to have
two powerful horses put into a heavy carriage, to take the
carriage three miles through the snowy slush and to keep it
standing there four hours, paying five roubles every time.

Now it seemed quite natural.

"Hire a pair for our carriage from the jobmaster," said he.

"Yes, sir."

And so, simply and easily, thanks to the facilities of town life,
Levin settled a question which, in the country, would have called
for so much personal trouble and exertion, and going out onto the
steps, he called a sledge, sat down, and drove to Nikitsky.  On
the way he thought no more of money, but mused on the
introduction that awaited him to the Petersburg savant, a writer
on sociology, and what he would say to him about his book.

Only during the first days of his stay in Moscow Levin had been
struck by the expenditure, strange to one living in the country,
unproductive but inevitable, that was expected of him on every
side.  But by now he had grown used to it.  That had happened to
him in this matter which is said to happen to drunkards--the
first glass sticks in the throat, the second flies down like a
hawk, but after the third they're like tiny little birds.  When
Levin had changed his first hundred-rouble note to pay for
liveries for his footmen and hall-porter he could not help
reflecting that these liveries were of no use to anyone--but
they were indubitably necessary, to judge by the amazement of the
princess and Kitty when he suggested that they might do without
liveries,--that these liveries would cost the wages of two
laborers for the summer, that is, would pay for about three
hundred working days from Easter to Ash Wednesday, and each a day
of hard work from early morning to late evening--and that
hundred-rouble note did stick in his throat.  But the next note,
changed to pay for providing a dinner for their relations, that
cost twenty-eight roubles, though it did excite in Levin the
reflection that twenty-eight roubles meant nine measures of oats,
which men would with groans and sweat have reaped and bound and
thrashed and winnowed and sifted and sown,--this next one he
parted with more easily.  And now the notes he changed no longer
aroused such reflections, and they flew off like little birds.
Whether the labor devoted to obtaining the money corresponded to
the pleasure given by what was bought with it, was a
consideration he had long ago dismissed.  His business
calculation that there was a certain price below which he could
not sell certain grain was forgotten too.  The rye, for the price
of which he had so long held out, had been sold for fifty kopecks
a measure cheaper than it had been fetching a month ago.  Even
the consideration that with such an expenditure he could not go
on living for a year without debt, that even had no force.  Only
one thing was essential: to have money in the bank, without
inquiring where it came from, so as to know that one had the
wherewithal to buy meat for tomorrow.  And this condition had
hitherto been fulfilled; he had always had the money in the bank.
But now the money in the bank had gone, and he could not quite
tell where to get the next installment.  And this it was which,
at the moment when Kitty had mentioned money, had disturbed him;
but he had no time to think about it.  He drove off, thinking of
Katavasov and the meeting with Metrov that was before him.



Chapter 3


Levin had on this visit to town seen a great deal of his old
friend at the university, Professor Katavasov, whom he had not
seen since his marriage.  He liked in Katavasov the clearness and
simplicity of his conception of life.  Levin thought that the
clearness of Katavasov's conception of life was due to the
poverty of his nature; Katavasov thought that the
disconnectedness of Levin's ideas was due to his lack of
intellectual discipline; but Levin enjoyed Katavasov's clearness,
and Katavasov enjoyed the abundance of Levin's untrained ideas,
and they liked to meet and to discuss.

Levin had read Katavasov some parts of his book, and he had liked
them.  On the previous day Katavasov had met Levin at a public
lecture and told him that the celebrated Metrov, whose article
Levin had so much liked, was in Moscow, that he had been much
interested by what Katavasov had told him about Levin's work, and
that he was coming to see him tomorrow at eleven, and would be
very glad to make Levin's acquaintance.

"You're positively a reformed character, I'm glad to see," said
Katavasov, meeting Levin in the little drawing room.  "I heard
the bell and thought:  Impossible that it can be he at the exact
time!...  Well, what do you say to the Montenegrins now?  They're
a race of warriors."

"Why, what's happened?" asked Levin.

Katavasov in a few words told him the last piece of news from the
war, and going into his study, introduced Levin to a short,
thick-set man of pleasant appearance.  This was Metrov.  The
conversation touched for a brief space on politics and on how
recent events were looked at in the higher spheres in Petersburg.
Metrov repeated a saying that had reached him through a most
trustworthy source, reported as having been uttered on this
subject by the Tsar and one of the ministers.  Katavasov had
heard also on excellent authority that the Tsar had said
something quite different.  Levin tried to imagine circumstances
in which both sayings might have been uttered, and the
conversation on that topic dropped.

"Yes, here he's written almost a book on the natural conditions
of the laborer in relation to the land," said Katavasov; "I'm not
a specialist, but I, as a natural science man, was pleased at
his not taking mankind as something outside biological laws; but,
on the contrary, seeing his dependence on his surroundings, and
in that dependence seeking the laws of his development."

"That's very interesting," said Metrov.

"What I began precisely was to write a book on agriculture; but
studying the chief instrument of agriculture, the laborer," said
Levin, reddening, "I could not help coming to quite unexpected
results."

And Levin began carefully, as it were, feeling his ground, to
expound his views.  He knew Metrov had written an article against
the generally accepted theory of political economy, but to what
extent he could reckon on his sympathy with his own new views he
did not know and could not guess from the clever and serene face
of the learned man.

"But in what do you see the special characteristics of the
Russian laborer?" said Metrov; "in his biological
characteristics, so to speak, or in the condition in which he is
placed?"

Levin saw that there was an idea underlying this question with
which he did not agree.  But he went on explaining his own idea
that the Russian laborer has a quite special view of the land,
different from that of other people; and to support this
proposition he made haste to add that in his opinion this
attitude of the Russian peasant was due to the consciousness of
his vocation to people vast unoccupied expanses in the East.

"One may easily be led into error in basing any conclusion on the
general vocation of a people," said Metrov, interrupting Levin.
"The condition of the laborer will always depend on his relation
to the land and to capital."

And without letting Levin finish explaining his idea, Metrov
began expounding to him the special point of his own theory.

In what the point of his theory lay, Levin did not understand,
because he did not take the trouble to understand.  He saw that
Metrov, like other people, in spite of his own article, in which
he had attacked the current theory of political economy, looked
at the position of the Russian peasant simply from the point of
view of capital, wages, and rent.  He would indeed have been
obliged to admit that in the eastern--much the larger--part of
Russia rent was as yet nil, that for nine-tenths of the eighty
millions of the Russian peasants wages took the form simply of
food provided for themselves, and that capital does not so far
exist except in the form of the most primitive tools.  Yet it was
only from that point of view that he considered every laborer,
though in many points he differed from the economists and had his
own theory of the wage-fund, which he expounded to Levin.

Levin listened reluctantly, and at first made objections.  He
would have liked to interrupt Metrov, to explain his own thought,
which in his opinion would have rendered further exposition of
Metrov's theories superfluous.  But later on, feeling convinced
that they looked at the matter so differently, that they could
never understand one another, he did not even oppose his
statements, but simply listened.  Although what Metrov was saying
was by now utterly devoid of interest for him, he yet experienced
a certain satisfaction in listening to him.  It flattered his
vanity that such a learned man should explain his ideas to him so
eagerly, with such intensity and confidence in Levin's
understanding of the subject, sometimes with a mere hint
referring him to a whole aspect of the subject.  He put this down
to his own credit, unaware that Metrov, who had already discussed
his theory over and over again with all his intimate friends,
talked of it with special eagerness to every new person, and in
general was eager to talk to anyone of any subject that
interested him, even if still obscure to himself.

"We are late though," said Katavasov, looking at his watch
directly Metrov had finished his discourse.

"Yes, there's a meeting of the Society of Amateurs today in
commemoration of the jubilee of Svintitch," said Katavasov in
answer to Levin's inquiry.  "Pyotr Ivanovitch and I were going.
I've promised to deliver an address on his labors in zoology.
Come along with us, it's very interesting."

"Yes, and indeed it's time to start," said Metrov.  "Come with
us, and from there, if you care to, come to my place.  I should
very much like to hear your work."

"Oh, no!  It's no good yet, it's unfinished.  But I shall be very
glad to go to the meeting."

"I say, friends, have you heard?  He has handed in the separate
report," Katavasov called from the other room, where he was
putting on his frock coat.

And a conversation sprang up upon the university question, which
was a very important event that winter in Moscow.  Three old
professors in the council had not accepted the opinion of the
younger professors.  The young ones had registered a separate
resolution.  This, in the judgment of some people, was monstrous,
in the judgment of others it was the simplest and most just thing
to do, and the professors were split up into two parties.

One party, to which Katavasov belonged, saw in the opposite party
a scoundrelly betrayal and treachery, while the opposite party
saw in them childishness and lack of respect for the authorities.
Levin, though he did not belong to the university, had several
times already during his stay in Moscow heard and talked about
this matter, and had his own opinion on the subject.  He took
part in the conversation that was continued in the street, as
they all three walked to the buildings of the old university.

The meeting had already begun.  Round the cloth-covered table, at
which Katavasov and Metrov seated themselves, there were some
half-dozen persons, and one of these was bending close over a
manuscript, reading something aloud.  Levin sat down in one of
the empty chairs that were standing round the table, and in a
whisper asked a student sitting near what was being read.  The
student, eyeing Levin with displeasure, said:

"Biography."

Though Levin was not interested in the biography, he could not
help listening, and learned some new and interesting facts about
the life of the distinguished man of science.

When the reader had finished, the chairman thanked him and read
some verses of the poet Ment sent him on the jubilee, and said a
few words by way of thanks to the poet.  Then Katavasov in his
loud, ringing voice read his address on the scientific labors of
the man whose jubilee was being kept.

When Katavasov had finished, Levin looked at his watch, saw it
was past one, and thought that there would not be time before the
concert to read Metrov his book, and indeed, he did not now care
to do so.  During the reading he had thought over their
conversation.  He saw distinctly now that though Metrov's ideas
might perhaps have value, his own ideas had a value too, and
their ideas could only be made clear and lead to something if
each worked separately in his chosen path, and that nothing would
be gained by putting their ideas together.  And having made up
his mind to refuse Metrov's invitation, Levin went up to him at
the end of the meeting.  Metrov introduced Levin to the chairman,
with whom he was talking of the political news.  Metrov told the
chairman what he had already told Levin, and Levin made the same
remarks on his news that he had already made that morning, but
for the sake of variety he expressed also a new opinion which had
only just struck him.  After that the conversation turned again
on the university question.  As Levin had already heard it all,
he made haste to tell Metrov that he was sorry he could not take
advantage of his invitation, took leave, and drove to Lvov's.



Chapter 4


Lvov, the husband of Natalia, Kitty's sister, had spent all his
life in  foreign capitals, where he had been educated, and had
been in the diplomatic service.

During the previous year he had left the diplomatic service, not
owing to any "unpleasantness" (he never had any "unpleasantness"
with anyone), and was transferred to the department of the court
of the palace in Moscow, in order to give his two boys the best
education possible.

In spite of the striking contrast in their habits and views and
the fact that Lvov was older than Levin, they had seen a great
deal of one another that winter, and had taken a great liking to
each other.

Lvov was at home, and Levin went in to him unannounced.

Lvov, in a house coat with a belt and in chamois leather shoes,
was sitting in an armchair, and with a pince-nez with blue
glasses he was reading a book that stood on a reading desk, while
in his beautiful hand he held a half-burned cigarette daintily
away from him.

His handsome, delicate, and still youthful-looking face, to which
his curly, glistening silvery hair gave a still more aristocratic
air, lighted up with a smile when he saw Levin.

"Capital!  I was meaning to send to you.  How's Kitty?  Sit here,
it's more comfortable."  He got up and pushed up a rocking chair.
"Have you read the last circular in the _Journal de St.
Petersbourg?_  I think it's excellent," he said, with a slight
French accent.

Levin told him what he had heard from Katavasov was being said in
Petersburg, and after talking a little about politics, he told
him of his interview with Metrov, and the learned society's
meeting.  To Lvov it was very interesting.

"That's what I envy you, that you are able to mix in these
interesting scientific circles," he said.  And as he talked, he
passed as usual into French, which was easier to him.  "It's true
I haven't the time for it.  My official work and the children
leave me no time; and then I'm not ashamed to own that my
education has been too defective."

"That I don't believe," said Levin with a smile, feeling, as he
always did, touched at Lvov's low opinion of himself, which was
not in the least put on from a desire to seem or to be modest,
but was absolutely sincere.

"Oh, yes, indeed!  I feel now how badly educated I am.  To
educate my children I positively have to look up a great deal,
and in fact simply to study myself.  For it's not enough to have
teachers, there must be someone to look after them, just as on
your land you want laborers and an overseer.  See what I'm
reading"--he pointed to Buslaev's _Grammar_ on the desk--"it's
expected of Misha, and it's so difficult....  Come, explain to
me....  Here he says..."

Levin tried to explain to him that it couldn't be understood, but
that it had to be taught; but Lvov would not agree with him.

"Oh, you're laughing at it!"

"On the contrary, you can't imagine how, when I look at you, I'm
always learning the task that lies before me, that is the
education of one's children."

"Well, there's nothing for you to learn," said Lvov.

"All I know," said Levin, "is that I have never seen better
brought-up children than yours, and I wouldn't wish for children
better than yours."

Lvov visibly tried to restrain the expression of his delight, but
he was positively radiant with smiles.

"If only they're better than I!  That's all I desire.  You don't
know yet all the work," he said, "with boys who've been left like
mine to run wild abroad."

"You'll catch all that up.  They're such clever children.  The
great thing is the education of character.  That's what I learn
when I look at your children."

"You talk of the education of character.  You can't imagine how
difficult that is!  You have hardly succeeded in combating one
tendency when others crop up, and the struggle begins again.  If
one had not a support in religion--you remember we talked about
that--no father could bring children up relying on his own
strength alone without that help."

This subject, which always interested Levin, was cut short by the
entrance of the beauty Natalia Alexandrovna, dressed to go out.

"I didn't know you were here," she said, unmistakably feeling no
regret, but a positive pleasure, in interrupting this
conversation on a topic she had heard so much of that she was by
now weary of it.  "Well, how is Kitty?  I am dining with you
today.  I tell you what, Arseny," she turned to her husband, "you
take the carriage."

And the husband and wife began to discuss their arrangements for
the day.  As the husband had to drive to meet someone on official
business, while the wife had to go to the concert and some public
meeting of a committee on the Eastern Question, there was a great
deal to consider and settle.  Levin had to take part in their
plans as one of themselves.  It was settled that Levin should go
with Natalia to the concert and the meeting, and that from there
they should send the carriage to the office for Arseny, and he
should call for her and take her to Kitty's; or that, if he had
not finished his work, he should send the carriage back and Levin
would go with her.

"He's spoiling me," Lvov said to his wife; "he assures me that
our children are splendid, when I know how much that's bad there
is in them."

"Arseny goes to extremes, I always say," said his wife.  "If you
look for perfection, you will never be satisfied.  And it's true,
as papa says,--that when we were brought up there was one
extreme--we were kept in the basement, while our parents lived in
the best rooms; now it's just the other way--the parents are in
the wash house, while the children are in the best rooms.
Parents now are not expected to live at all, but to exist
altogether for their children."

"Well, what if they like it better?" Lvov said, with his
beautiful smile, touching her hand.  "Anyone who didn't know you
would think you were a stepmother, not a true mother."

"No, extremes are not good in anything," Natalia said serenely,
putting his paper knife straight in its proper place on the
table.

"Well, come here, you perfect children," Lvov said to the two
handsome boys who came in, and after bowing to Levin, went up to
their father, obviously wishing to ask him about something.

Levin would have liked to talk to them, to hear what they would
say to their father, but Natalia began talking to him, and then
Lvov's colleague in the service, Mahotin, walked in, wearing his
court uniform, to go with him to meet someone, and a conversation
was kept up without a break upon Herzegovina, Princess
Korzinskaya, the town council, and the sudden death of Madame
Apraksina.

Levin even forgot the commission intrusted to him.  He
recollected it as he was going into the hall.

"Oh, Kitty told me to talk to you about Oblonsky," he said, as
Lvov was standing on the stairs, seeing his wife and Levin off.

"Yes, yes, maman wants us, _les beaux-frères,_ to attack him,"
he said, blushing.  "But why should I?"

"Well, then, I will attack him," said Madame Lvova, with a smile,
standing in her white sheepskin cape, waiting till they had
finished speaking.  "Come, let us go."



Chapter 5


At the concert in the afternoon two very interesting things were
performed.  One was a fantasia, _King Lear;_ the other was a
quartette dedicated to the memory of Bach.  Both were new and in
the new style, and Levin was eager to form an opinion of them.
After escorting his sister-in-law to her stall, he stood against
a column and tried to listen as attentively and conscientiously
as possible.  He tried not to let his attention be distracted,
and not to spoil his impression by looking at the conductor in a
white tie, waving his arms, which always disturbed his enjoyment
of music so much, or the ladies in bonnets, with strings
carefully tied over their ears, and all these people either
thinking of nothing at all or thinking of all sorts of things
except the music.  He tried to avoid meeting musical connoisseurs
or talkative acquaintances, and stood looking at the floor
straight before him, listening.

But the more he listened to the fantasia of King Lear the further
he felt from forming any definite opinion of it.  There was, as
it were, a continual beginning, a preparation of the musical
expression of some feeling, but it fell to pieces again directly,
breaking into new musical motives, or simply nothing but the
whims of the composer, exceedingly complex but disconnected
sounds.  And these fragmentary musical expressions, though
sometimes beautiful, were disagreeable, because they were utterly
unexpected and not led up to by anything.  Gaiety and grief and
despair and tenderness and triumph followed one another without
any connection, like the emotions of a madman.  And those
emotions, like a madman's, sprang up quite unexpectedly.

During the whole of the performance Levin felt like a deaf man
watching people dancing, and was in a state of complete
bewilderment when the fantasia was over, and felt a great
weariness from the fruitless strain on his attention.  Loud
applause resounded on all sides.  Everyone got up, moved about,
and began talking.  Anxious to throw some light on his own
perplexity from the impressions of others, Levin began to walk
about, looking for connoisseurs, and was glad to see a well-known
musical amateur in conversation with Pestsov, whom he knew.

"Marvelous!" Pestsov was saying in his mellow bass.  "How are
you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch?  Particularly sculpturesque and
plastic, so to say, and richly colored is that passage where you
feel Cordelia's approach, where woman, _das ewig Weibliche,_
enters into conflict with fate.  Isn't it?"

"You mean...what has Cordelia to do with it?" Levin asked
timidly, forgetting that the fantasia was supposed to represent
King Lear.

"Cordelia comes in...see here!" said Pestsov, tapping his finger
on the satiny surface of the program he held in his hand and
passing it to Levin.

Only then Levin recollected the title of the fantasia, and made
haste to read in the Russian translation the lines from
Shakespeare that were printed on the back of the program.

"You can't follow it without that," said Pestsov, addressing
Levin, as the person he had been speaking to had gone away, and
he had no one to talk to.

In the _entr'acte_ Levin and Pestsov fell into an argument upon
the merits and defects of music of the Wagner school.  Levin
maintained that the mistake of Wagner and all his followers lay
in their trying to take music into the sphere of another art,
just as poetry goes wrong when it tries to paint a face as the
art of painting ought to do, and as an instance of this mistake
he cited the sculptor who carved in marble certain poetic
phantasms flitting round the figure of the poet on the pedestal.
"These phantoms were so far from being phantoms that they were
positively clinging on the ladder," said Levin.  The comparison
pleased him, but he could not remember whether he had not used
the same phrase before, and to Pestsov, too, and as he said it he
felt confused.

Pestsov maintained that art is one, and that it can attain its
highest manifestations only by conjunction with all kinds of art.

The second piece that was performed Levin could not hear.
Pestsov, who was standing beside him, was talking to him almost
all the time, condemning the music for its excessive affected
assumption of simplicity, and comparing it with the simplicity of
the Pre-Raphaelites in painting.  As he went out Levin met many
more acquaintances, with whom he talked of politics, of music,
and of common acquaintances.  Among others he met Count Bol, whom
he had utterly forgotten to call upon.

"Well, go at once then," Madame Lvova said, when he told her;
"perhaps they'll not be at home, and then you can come to the
meeting to fetch me.  You'll find me still there."



Chapter 6


"Perhaps they're not at home?" said Levin, as he went into the
hall of Countess Bola's house.

"At home; please walk in," said the porter, resolutely removing
his overcoat.

"How annoying!" thought Levin with a sigh, taking off one glove
and stroking his hat.  "What did I come for?  What have I to say
to them?"

As he passed through the first drawing room Levin met in the
doorway Countess Bola, giving some order to a servant with a
care-worn and severe face.  On seeing Levin she smiled, and asked
him to come into the little drawing room, where he heard voices.
In this room there were sitting in armchairs the two daughters of
the countess, and a Moscow colonel, whom Levin knew.  Levin went
up, greeted them, and sat down beside the sofa with his hat on
his knees.

"How is your wife?  Have you been at the concert?  We couldn't
go.  Mamma had to be at the funeral service."

"Yes, I heard....  What a sudden death!" said Levin.

The countess came in, sat down on the sofa, and she too asked
after his wife and inquired about the concert.

Levin answered, and repeated an inquiry about Madame Apraksina's
sudden death.

"But she was always in weak health."

"Were you at the opera yesterday?"

"Yes, I was."

"Lucca was very good."

"Yes, very good," he said, and as it was utterly of no
consequence to him what they thought of him, he began repeating
what they had heard a hundred times about the characteristics of
the singer's talent.  Countess Bola pretended to be listening.
Then, when he had said enough and paused, the colonel, who had
been silent till then, began to talk.  The colonel too talked of
the opera, and about culture.  At last, after speaking of the
proposed _folle journée_ at Turin's, the colonel laughed, got up
noisily, and went away.  Levin too rose, but he saw by the face
of the countess that it was not yet time for him to go.  He must
stay two minutes longer.  He sat down.

But as he was thinking all the while how stupid it was, he could
not find a subject for conversation, and sat silent.

"You are not going to the public meeting?  They say it will be
very interesting," began the countess.

"No, I promised my belle-soeur to fetch her from it," said
Levin.

A silence followed.  The mother once more exchanged glances with
a daughter.

"Well, now I think the time has come," thought Levin, and he got
up.  The ladies shook hands with him, and begged him to say
_mille choses_ to his wife for them.

The porter asked him, as he gave him his coat, "Where is your
honor staying?" and immediately wrote down his address in a big
handsomely bound book.

"Of course I don't care, but still I feel ashamed and awfully
stupid," thought Levin, consoling himself with the reflection
that everyone does it.  He drove to the public meeting, where he
was to find his sister-in-law, so as to drive home with her.

At the public meeting of the committee there were a great many
people, and almost all the highest society.  Levin was in time
for the report which, as everyone said, was very interesting.
When the reading of the report was over, people moved about, and
Levin met Sviazhsky, who invited him very pressingly to come that
evening to a meeting of the Society of Agriculture, where a
celebrated lecture was to be delivered, and Stepan Arkadyevitch,
who had only just come from the races, and many other
acquaintances; and Levin heard and uttered various criticisms on
the meeting, on the new fantasia, and on a public trial.  But,
probably from the mental fatigue he was beginning to feel, he
made a blunder in speaking of the trial, and this blunder he
recalled several times with vexation.  Speaking of the sentence
upon a foreigner who had been condemned in Russia, and of how
unfair it would be to punish him by exile abroad, Levin repeated
what he had heard the day before in conversation from an
acquaintance.

"I think sending him abroad is much the same as punishing a carp
by putting it into the water," said Levin.  Then he recollected
that this idea, which he had heard from an acquaintance and
uttered as his own, came from a fable of Krilov's, and that the
acquaintance had picked it up from a newspaper article.

After driving home with his sister-in-law, and finding Kitty in
good spirits and quite well, Levin drove to the club.



Chapter 7


Levin reached the club just at the right time.  Members and
visitors were driving up as he arrived.  Levin had not been at
the club for a very long while--not since he lived in Moscow,
when he was leaving the university and going into society.  He
remembered the club, the external details of its arrangement, but
he had completely forgotten the impression it had made on him in
old days.  But as soon as, driving into the wide semicircular
court and getting out of the sledge, he mounted the steps, and
the hall porter, adorned with a crossway scarf, noiselessly
opened the door to him with a bow; as soon as he saw in the
porter's room the cloaks and galoshes of members who thought it
less trouble to take them off downstairs; as soon as he heard the
mysterious ringing bell that preceded him as he ascended the
easy, carpeted staircase, and saw the statue on the landing, and
the third porter at the top doors, a familiar figure grown older,
in the club livery, opening the door without haste or delay, and
scanning the visitors as they passed in--Levin felt the old
impression of the club come back in a rush, an impression of
repose, comfort, and propriety.

"Your hat, please," the porter said to Levin, who forgot the club
rule to leave his hat in the porter's room.  "Long time since
you've been.  The prince put your name down yesterday.  Prince
Stepan Arkadyevitch is not here yet."

The porter did not only know Levin, but also all his ties and
relationships, and so immediately mentioned his intimate friends.

Passing through the outer hall, divided up by screens, and the
room partitioned on the right, where a man sits at the fruit
buffet, Levin overtook an old man walking slowly in, and entered
the dining room full of noise and people.

He walked along the tables, almost all full, and looked at the
visitors.  He saw people of all sorts, old and young; some he
knew a little, some intimate friends.  There was not a single
cross or worried-looking face.  All seemed to have left their
cares and anxieties in the porter's room with their hats, and
were all deliberately getting ready to enjoy the material
blessings of life.  Sviazhsky was here and Shtcherbatsky,
Nevyedovsky and the old prince, and Vronsky and Sergey
Ivanovitch.

"Ah! why are you late?" the prince said smiling, and giving him
his hand over his own shoulder.  "How's Kitty?" he added,
smoothing out the napkin he had tucked in at his waistcoat
buttons.

"All right; they are dining at home, all the three of them."

"Ah, 'Aline-Nadine,' to be sure!  There's no room with us.  Go to
that table, and make haste and take a seat," said the prince, and
turning away he carefully took a plate of eel soup.

"Levin, this way!" a good-natured voice shouted a little farther
on.  It was Turovtsin.  He was sitting with a young officer, and
beside them were two chairs turned upside down.  Levin gladly
went up to them.  He had always liked the good-hearted rake,
Turovtsin--he was associated in his mind with memories of his
courtship--and at that moment, after the strain of intellectual
conversation, the sight of Turovtsin's good-natured face was
particularly welcome.

"For you and Oblonsky.  He'll be here directly."

The young man, holding himself very erect, with eyes forever
twinkling with enjoyment, was an officer from Petersburg, Gagin.
Turovtsin introduced them.

"Oblonsky's always late."

"Ah, here he is!"

"Have you only just come?" said Oblonsky, coming quickly towards
them.  "Good day.  Had some vodka?  Well, come along then."

Levin got up and went with him to the big table spread with
spirits and appetizers of the most various kinds.  One would have
thought that out of two dozen delicacies one might find something
to one's taste, but Stepan Arkadyevitch asked for something
special, and one of the liveried waiters standing by immediately
brought what was required.  They drank a wine glassful and
returned to their table.

At once, while they were still at the soup, Gagin was served with
champagne, and told the waiter to fill four glasses.  Levin did
not refuse the wine, and asked for a second bottle.  He was very
hungry, and ate and drank with great enjoyment, and with still
greater enjoyment took part in the lively and simple conversation
of his companions.  Gagin, dropping his voice, told the last good
story from Petersburg, and the story, though improper and stupid,
was so ludicrous that Levin broke into roars of laughter so loud
that those near looked round.

"That's in the same style as, 'that's a thing I can't endure!'
You know the story?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "Ah, that's
exquisite!  Another bottle," he said to the waiter, and he began
to relate his good story.

"Pyotr Illyitch Vinovsky invites you to drink with him," a little
old waiter interrupted Stepan Arkadyevitch, bringing two delicate
glasses of sparkling champagne, and addressing Stepan
Arkadyevitch and Levin.  Stepan Arkadyevitch took the glass, and
looking towards a bald man with red mustaches at the other end of
the table, he nodded to him, smiling.

"Who's that?" asked Levin.

"You met him once at my place, don't you remember?  A
good-natured fellow."

Levin did the same as Stepan Arkadyevitch and took the glass.

Stepan Arkadyevitch's anecdote too was very amusing.  Levin told
his story, and that too was successful.  Then they talked of
horses, of the races, of what they had been doing that day, and
of how smartly Vronsky's Atlas had won the first prize.  Levin
did not notice how the time passed at dinner.

"Ah! and here they are!" Stepan Arkadyevitch said towards the end
of dinner, leaning over the back of his chair and holding out his
hand to Vronsky, who came up with a tall officer of the Guards.
Vronsky's face too beamed with the look of good-humored enjoyment
that was general in the club.  He propped his elbow playfully on
Stepan Arkadyevitch's shoulder, whispering something to him, and
he held out his hand to Levin with the same good-humored smile.

"Very glad to meet you," he said.  "I looked out for you at the
election, but I was told you had gone away."

"Yes, I left the same day.  We've just been talking of your
horse.  I congratulate you," said Levin.  "It was very rapidly
run."

"Yes; you've race horses too, haven't you?"

"No, my father had; but I remember and know something about it."

"Where have you dined?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"We were at the second table, behind the columns."

"We've been celebrating his success," said the tall colonel.
"It's his second Imperial prize.  I wish I might have the luck at
cards he has with horses.  Well, why waste the precious time?
I'm going to the 'infernal regions,'" added the colonel, and he
walked away.

"That's Yashvin," Vronsky said in answer to Turovtsin, and he sat
down in the vacated seat beside them.  He drank the glass offered
him, and ordered a bottle of wine.  Under the influence of the
club atmosphere or the wine he had drunk, Levin chatted away to
Vronsky of the best breeds of cattle, and was very glad not to
feel the slightest hostility to this man.  He even told him,
among other things, that he had heard from his wife that she had
met him at Princess Marya Borissovna's.

"Ah, Princess Marya Borissovna, she's exquisite!" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, and he told an anecdote about her which set them
all laughing.  Vronsky particularly laughed with such
simplehearted amusement that Levin felt quite reconciled to him.

"Well, have we finished?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up
with a smile.  "Let us go."



Chapter 8


Getting up from the table, Levin walked with Gagin through the
lofty room to the billiard room, feeling his arms swing as he
walked with a peculiar lightness and ease.  As he crossed the big
room, he came upon his father-in-law.

"Well, how do you like our Temple of Indolence?" said the prince,
taking his arm.  "Come along, come along!"

"Yes, I wanted to walk about and look at everything.  It's
interesting."

"Yes, it's interesting for you.  But its interest for me is quite
different.  You look at those little old men now," he said,
pointing to a club member with bent back and projecting lip,
shuffling towards them in his soft boots, "and imagine that they
were _shlupiks_ like that from their birth up."

"How _shlupiks_?"

"I see you don't know that name.  That's our club designation.
You know the game of rolling eggs: when one's rolled a long while
it becomes a _shlupik_.  So it is with us; one goes on coming and
coming to the club, and ends by becoming a _shlupik_.  Ah, you
laugh! but we look out, for fear of dropping into it ourselves.
You know Prince Tchetchensky?" inquired the prince; and Levin saw
by his face that he was just going to relate something funny.

"No, I don't know him."

"You don't say so!  Well, Prince Tchetchensky is a well-known
figure.  No matter, though.  He's always playing billiards here.
Only three years ago he was not a _shlupik_ and kept up his spirits
and even used to call other people _shlupiks_.  But one day he
turns up, and our porter...you know Vassily?  Why, that fat one;
he's famous for his _bon mots_.  And so Prince Tchetchensky asks
him, 'Come, Vassily, who's here?  Any _shlupiks_ here yet?' And he
says, 'You're the third.' Yes, my dear boy, that he did!"

Talking and greeting the friends they met, Levin and the prince
walked through all the rooms: the great room where tables had
already been set, and the usual partners were playing for small
stakes; the divan room, where they were playing chess, and Sergey
Ivanovitch was sitting talking to somebody; the billiard room,
where, about a sofa in a recess, there was a lively party
drinking champagne--Gagin was one of them.  They peeped into the
"infernal regions," where a good many men were crowding round one
table, at which Yashvin was sitting.  Trying not to make a noise,
they walked into the dark reading room, where under the shaded
lamps there sat a young man with a wrathful countenance, turning
over one journal after another, and a bald general buried in a
book.  They went, too, into what the prince called the
intellectual room, where three gentlemen were engaged in a heated
discussion of the latest political news.

"Prince, please come, we're ready," said one of his card party,
who had come to look for him, and the prince went off.  Levin sat
down and listened, but recalling all the conversation of the
morning he felt all of a sudden fearfully bored.  He got up
hurriedly, and went to look for Oblonsky and Turovtsin, with whom
it had been so pleasant.

Turovtsin was one of the circle drinking in the billiard room,
and Stepan Arkadyevitch was talking with Vronsky near the door at
the farther corner of the room.

"It's not that she's dull; but this undefined, this unsettled
position," Levin caught, and he was hurrying away, but Stepan
Arkadyevitch called to him.

"Levin," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and Levin noticed that his
eyes were not full of tears exactly, but moist, which always
happened when he had been drinking, or when he was touched.  Just
now it was due to both causes.  "Levin, don't go," he said, and
he warmly squeezed his arm above the elbow, obviously not at all
wishing to let him go.

"This is a true friend of mine--almost my greatest friend," he
said to Vronsky.  "You have become even closer and dearer to me.
And I want you, and I know you ought, to be friends, and great
friends, because you're both splendid fellows."

"Well, there's nothing for us now but to kiss and be friends,"
Vronsky said, with good-natured playfulness, holding out his
hand.

Levin quickly took the offered hand, and pressed it warmly.

"I'm very, very glad," said Levin.

"Waiter, a bottle of champagne," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"And I'm very glad," said Vronsky.

But in spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch's desire, and their own
desire, they had nothing to talk about, and both felt it.

"Do you know, he has never met Anna?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
Vronsky.  "And I want above everything to take him to see her.
Let us go, Levin!"

"Really?" said Vronsky.  "She will be very glad to see you.  I
should be going home at once," he added, "but I'm worried about
Yashvin, and I want to stay on till he finishes."

"Why, is he losing?"

"He keeps losing, and I'm the only friend that can restrain him."

"Well, what do you say to pyramids?  Levin, will you play?
Capital!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "Get the table ready," he
said to the marker.

"It has been ready a long while," answered the marker, who had
already set the balls in a triangle, and was knocking the red one
about for his own diversion.

"Well, let us begin."

After the game Vronsky and Levin sat down at Gagin's table, and
at Stepan Arkadyevitch's suggestion Levin took a hand in the
game.

Vronsky sat down at the table, surrounded by friends, who were
incessantly coming up to him.  Every now and then he went to the
"infernal" to keep an eye on Yashvin.  Levin was enjoying a
delightful sense of repose after the mental fatigue of the
morning.  He was glad that all hostility was at an end with
Vronsky, and the sense of peace, decorum, and comfort never left
him.

When the game was over, Stepan Arkadyevitch took Levin's arm.

"Well, let us go to Anna's, then.  At once?  Eh?  She is at home.
I promised her long ago to bring you.  Where were you meaning to
spend the evening?"

"Oh, nowhere specially.  I promised Sviazhsky to go to the
Society of Agriculture.  By all means, let us go," said Levin.

"Very good; come along.  Find out if my carriage is here," Stepan
Arkadyevitch said to the waiter.

Levin went up to the table, paid the forty roubles he had lost;
paid his bill, the amount of which was in some mysterious way
ascertained by the little old waiter who stood at the counter,
and swinging his arms he walked through all the rooms to the way
out.



Chapter 9


"Oblonsky's carriage!" the porter shouted in an angry bass.  The
carriage drove up and both got in.  It was only for the first few
moments, while the carriage was driving out of the clubhouse
gates, that Levin was still under the influence of the club
atmosphere of repose, comfort, and unimpeachable good form.  But
as soon as the carriage drove out into the street, and he felt it
jolting over the uneven road, heard the angry shout of a sledge
driver coming towards them, saw in the uncertain light the red
blind of a tavern and the shops, this impression was dissipated,
and he began to think over his actions, and to wonder whether he
was doing right in going to see Anna.  What would Kitty say?  But
Stepan Arkadyevitch gave him no time for reflection, and, as
though divining his doubts, he scattered them.

"How glad I am," he said, "that you should know her!  You know
Dolly has long wished for it.  And Lvov's been to see her, and
often goes.  Though she is my sister," Stepan Arkadyevitch
pursued, "I don't hesitate to say that she's a remarkable woman.
But you will see.  Her position is very painful, especially now."

"Why especially now?"

"We are carrying on negotiations with her husband about a
divorce.  And he's agreed; but there are difficulties in regard
to the son, and the business, which ought to have been arranged
long ago, has been dragging on for three months past.  As soon as
the divorce is over, she will marry Vronsky.  How stupid these
old ceremonies are, that no one believes in, and which only
prevent people being comfortable!" Stepan Arkadyevitch put in.
"Well, then their position will be as regular as mine, as yours."

"What is the difficulty?" said Levin.

"Oh, it's a long and tedious story!  The whole business is in
such an anomalous position with us.  But the point is she has
been for three months in Moscow, where everyone knows her,
waiting for the divorce; she goes out nowhere, sees no woman
except Dolly, because, do you understand, she doesn't care to
have people come as a favor.  That fool Princess Varvara, even
she has left her, considering this a breach of propriety.  Well,
you see, in such a position any other woman would not have found
resources in herself.  But you'll see how she has arranged her
life--how calm, how dignified she is.  To the left, in the
crescent opposite the church!" shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch,
leaning out of the window.  "Phew! how hot it is!" he said, in
spite of twelve degrees of frost, flinging his open overcoat
still wider open.

"But she has a daughter: no doubt she's busy looking after her?"
said Levin.

"I believe you picture every woman simply as a female, _une
couveuse,_" said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "If she's occupied, it
must be with her children.  No, she brings her up capitally, I
believe, but one doesn't hear about her.  She's busy, in the
first place, with what she writes.  I see you're smiling
ironically, but you're wrong.  She's writing a children's book,
and doesn't talk about it to anyone, but she read it to me and I
gave the manuscript to Vorkuev...you know the publisher...and
he's an author himself too, I fancy.  He understands those
things, and he says it's a remarkable piece of work.  But are you
fancying she's an authoress?--not a bit of it.  She's a woman
with a heart, before everything, but you'll see.  Now she has a
little English girl with her, and a whole family she's looking
after."

"Oh, something in a philanthropic way?"

"Why, you will look at everything in the worst light.  It's not
from philanthropy, it's from the heart.  They--that is, Vronsky--
had a trainer, an Englishman, first-rate in his own line, but a
drunkard.  He's completely given up to drink--delirium tremens--
and the family were cast on the world.  She saw them, helped
them, got more and more interested in them, and now the whole
family is on her hands.  But not by way of patronage, you know,
helping with money; she's herself preparing the boys in Russian
for the high school, and she's taken the little girl to live with
her.  But you'll see her for yourself."

The carriage drove into the courtyard, and Stepan Arkadyevitch
rang loudly at the entrance where sledges were standing.

And without asking the servant who opened the door whether the
lady were at home, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked into the hall.
Levin followed him, more and more doubtful whether he was doing
right or wrong.

Looking at himself in the glass, Levin noticed that he was red in
the face, but he felt certain he was not drunk, and he followed
Stepan Arkadyevitch up the carpeted stairs.  At the top Stepan
Arkadyevitch inquired of the footman, who bowed to him as to an
intimate friend, who was with Anna Arkadyevna, and received the
answer that it was M. Vorkuev.

"Where are they?"

"In the study."

Passing through the dining room, a room not very large, with
dark, paneled walls, Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin walked over
the soft carpet to the half-dark study, lighted up by a single
lamp with a big dark shade.  Another lamp with a reflector was
hanging on the wall, lighting up a big full-length portrait of
a woman, which Levin could not help looking at.  It was the
portrait of Anna, painted in Italy by Mihailov.  While Stepan
Arkadyevitch went behind the _treillage_, and the man's voice
which had been speaking paused, Levin gazed at the portrait,
which stood out from the frame in the brilliant light thrown
on it, and he could not tear himself away from it.  He positively
forgot where he was, and not even hearing what was said, he could
not take his eyes off the marvelous portrait.  It was not a
picture, but a living, charming woman, with black curling hair,
with bare arms and shoulders, with a pensive smile on the lips,
covered with soft down; triumphantly and softly she looked at him
with eyes that baffled him.  She was not living only because she
was more beautiful than a living woman can be.

"I am delighted!" He heard suddenly near him a voice,
unmistakably addressing him, the voice of the very woman he had
been admiring in the portrait.  Anna had come from behind the
treillage to meet him, and Levin saw in the dim light of the
study the very woman of the portrait, in a dark blue shot gown,
not in the same position nor with the same expression, but with
the same perfection of beauty which the artist had caught in the
portrait.  She was less dazzling in reality, but, on the other
hand, there was something fresh and seductive in the living woman
which was not in the portrait.



Chapter 10


She had risen to meet him, not concealing her pleasure at seeing
him;  and in the quiet ease with which she held out her little
vigorous hand, introduced him to Vorkuev and indicated a
red-haired, pretty little girl who was sitting at work, calling
her her pupil, Levin recognized and liked the manners of a woman
of the great world, always self-possessed and natural.

"I am delighted, delighted," she repeated, and on her lips these
simple words took for Levin's ears a special significance.  "I
have known you and liked you for a long while, both from your
friendship with Stiva and for your wife's sake....  I knew her
for a very short time, but she left on me the impression of an
exquisite flower, simply a flower.  And to think she will soon be
a mother!"

She spoke easily and without haste, looking now and then from
Levin to her brother, and Levin felt that the impression he was
making was good, and he felt immediately at home, simple and
happy with her, as though he had known her from childhood.

"Ivan Petrovitch and I settled in Alexey's study," she said in
answer to Stepan Arkadyevitch's question whether he might smoke,
"just so as to be able to smoke"--and glancing at Levin, instead
of asking whether he would smoke, she pulled closer a
tortoise-shell cigar-case and took a cigarette.

"How are you feeling today?" her brother asked her.

"Oh, nothing.  Nerves, as usual."

"Yes, isn't it extraordinarily fine?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
noticing that Levin was scrutinizing the picture.

"I have never seen a better portrait."

"And extraordinarily like, isn't it?" said Vorkuev.

Levin looked from the portrait to the original.  A peculiar
brilliance lighted up Anna's face when she felt his eyes on her.
Levin flushed, and to cover his confusion would have asked
whether she had seen Darya Alexandrovna lately; but at that
moment Anna spoke.  "We were just talking, Ivan Petrovitch and I,
of Vashtchenkov's last pictures.  Have you seen them?"

"Yes, I have seen them," answered Levin.

"But, I beg your pardon, I interrupted you...you were saying?..."

Levin asked if she had seen Dolly lately.

"She was here yesterday.  She was very indignant with the high
school people on Grisha's account.  The Latin teacher, it seems,
had been unfair to him."

"Yes, I have seen his pictures.  I didn't care for them very
much," Levin went back to the subject she had started.

Levin talked now not at all with that purely businesslike
attitude to the subject with which he had been talking all the
morning.  Every word in his conversation with her had a special
significance.  And talking to her was pleasant; still pleasanter
it was to listen to her.

Anna talked not merely naturally and cleverly, but cleverly and
carelessly, attaching no value to her own ideas and giving great
weight to the ideas of the person she was talking to.

The conversation turned on the new movement in art, on the new
illustrations of the Bible by a French artist.  Vorkuev attacked
the artist for a realism carried to the point of coarseness.

Levin said that the French had carried conventionality further
than anyone, and that consequently they see a great merit in the
return to realism.  In the fact of not lying they see poetry.

Never had anything clever said by Levin given him so much
pleasure as this remark.  Anna's face lighted up at once, as at
once she appreciated the thought.  She laughed.

"I laugh," she said, "as one laughs when one sees a very true
portrait.  What you said so perfectly hits off French art now,
painting and literature too, indeed--Zola, Daudet.  But perhaps
it is always so, that men form their conceptions from fictitious,
conventional types, and then--all the _combinaisons_ made--they
are tired of the fictitious figures and begin to invent more
natural, true figures."

"That's perfectly true," said Vorknev.

"So you've been at the club?" she said to her brother.

"Yes, yes, this is a woman!" Levin thought, forgetting himself
and staring persistently at her lovely, mobile face, which at
that moment was all at once completely transformed.  Levin did
not hear what she was talking of as she leaned over to her
brother, but he was struck by the change of her expression.  Her
face--so handsome a moment before in its repose--suddenly wore a
look of strange curiosity, anger, and pride.  But this lasted
only an instant.  She dropped her eyelids, as though recollecting
something.

"Oh, well, but that's of no interest to anyone," she said, and
she turned to the English girl.

"Please order the tea in the drawing room," she said in English.

The girl got up and went out.

"Well, how did she get through her examination?" asked Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

"Splendidly!  She's a very gifted child and a sweet character."

"It will end in your loving her more than your own."

"There a man speaks.  In love there's no more nor less.  I love
my daughter with one love, and her with another."

"I was just telling Anna Arkadyevna," said Vorkuev, "that if she
were to put a hundredth part of the energy she devotes to this
English girl to the public question of the education of Russian
children, she would be doing a great and useful work."

"Yes, but I can't help it; I couldn't do it.  Count Alexey
Kirillovitch urged me very much" (as she uttered the words _Count
Alexey Kirillovitch_ she glanced with appealing timidity at Levin,
and he unconsciously responded with a respectful and reassuring
look); "he urged me to take up the school in the village.  I
visited it several times.  The children were very nice, but I
could not feel drawn to the work.  You speak of energy.  Energy
rests upon love; and come as it will, there's no forcing it.  I
took to this child--I could not myself say why."

And she glanced again at Levin.  And her smile and her glance--
all told him that it was to him only she was addressing her
words, valuing his good opinion, and at the same time sure
beforehand that they understood each other.

"I quite understand that," Levin answered.  "It's impossible to
give one's heart to a school or such institutions in general, and
I believe that's just why philanthropic institutions always
give such poor results."

She was silent for a while, then she smiled.

"Yes, yes," she agreed; "I never could.  _Je n'ai pas le coeur
assez_ large to love a whole asylum of horrid little girls.
_Cela ne m'a jamais réussi._  There are so many women who have
made themselves _une position sociale_ in that way.  And now more
than ever," she said with a mournful, confiding expression,
ostensibly addressing her brother, but unmistakably intending her
words only for Levin, "now when I have such need of some occupation,
I cannot."  And suddenly frowning (Levin saw that she was frowning
at herself for talking about herself) she changed the subject.
"I know about you," she said to Levin; "that you're not a
public-spirited citizen, and I have defended you to the best of
my ability."

"How have you defended me?"

"Oh, according to the attacks made on you.  But won't you have
some tea?"  She rose and took up a book bound in morocco.

"Give it to me, Anna Arkadyevna," said Vorkuev, indicating the
book.  "It's well worth taking up."

"Oh, no, it's all so sketchy."

"I told him about it," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his sister,
nodding at Levin.

"You shouldn't have.  My writing is something after the fashion
of those little baskets and carving which Liza Mertsalova used to
sell me from the prisons.  She had the direction of the prison
department in that society," she turned to Levin; "and they were
miracles of patience, the work of those poor wretches."

And Levin saw a new trait in this woman, who attracted him so
extraordinarily.  Besides wit, grace, and beauty, she had truth.
She had no wish to hide from him all the bitterness of her
position.  As she said that she sighed, and her face suddenly
taking a hard expression, looked as it were turned to stone.
With that expression on her face she was more beautiful than
ever; but the expression was new; it was utterly unlike that
expression, radiant with happiness and creating happiness, which
had been caught by the painter in her portrait.  Levin looked
more than once at the portrait and at her figure, as taking her
brother's arm she walked with him to the high doors and he felt
for her a tenderness and pity at which he wondered himself.

She asked Levin and Vorkuev to go into the drawing room, while
she stayed behind to say a few words to her brother.  "About her
divorce, about Vronsky, and what he's doing at the club, about
me?" wondered Levin.  And he was so keenly interested by the
question of what she was saying to Stepan Arkadyevitch, that he
scarcely heard what Vorkuev was telling him of the qualities of
the story for children Anna Arkadyevna had written.

At tea the same pleasant sort of talk, full of interesting
matter, continued.  There was not a single instant when a subject
for conversation was to seek; on the contrary, it was felt that
one had hardly time to say what one had to say, and eagerly held
back to hear what the others were saying.  And all that was said,
not only by her, but by Vorkuev and Stepan Arkadyevitch--all, so
it seemed to Levin, gained peculiar significance from her
appreciation and her criticism.  While he followed this
interesting conversation, Levin was all the time admiring her--
her beauty, her intelligence, her culture, and at the same time
her directness and genuine depth of feeling.  He listened and
talked, and all the while he was thinking of her inner life,
trying to divine her feelings.  And though he had judged her so
severely hitherto, now by some strange chain of reasoning he was
justifying her and was also sorry for her, and afraid that
Vronsky did not fully understand her.  At eleven o'clock, when
Stepan Arkadyevitch got up to go (Vorkuev had left earlier), it
seemed to Levin that he had only just come.  Regretfully Levin
too rose.

"Good-bye," she said, holding his hand and glancing into his face
with a winning look.  "I am very glad _que la glace est rompue._"

She dropped his hand, and half closed her eyes.

"Tell your wife that I love her as before, and that if she cannot
pardon me my position, then my wish for her is that she may never
pardon it.  To pardon it, one must go through what I have gone
through, and may God spare her that."

"Certainly, yes, I will tell her..." Levin said, blushing.



Chapter 11


"What a marvelous, sweet and unhappy woman!" he was thinking,
as he stepped out into the frosty air with Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Well, didn't I tell you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, seeing that
Levin had been completely won over.

"Yes," said Levin dreamily, "an extraordinary woman!  It's not
her cleverness, but she has such wonderful depth of feeling.  I'm
awfully sorry for her!"

"Now, please God, everything will soon be settled.  Well, well,
don't be hard on people in future," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
opening the carriage door.  "Good-bye; we don't go the same way."

Still thinking of Anna, of everything, even the simplest phrase
in their conversation with her, and recalling the minutest
changes in her expression, entering more and more into her
position, and feeling sympathy for her, Levin reached home.


At home Kouzma told Levin that Katerina Alexandrovna was quite
well, and that her sisters had not long been gone, and he handed
him two letters.  Levin read them at once in the hall, that he
might not over look them later.  One was from Sokolov, his
bailiff.  Sokolov wrote that the corn could not be sold, that it
was fetching only five and a half roubles, and that more than
that could not be got for it.  The other letter was from his
sister.  She scolded him for her business being still unsettled.

"Well, we must sell it at five and a half if we can't get more,"
Levin decided the first question, which had always before seemed
such a weighty one, with extraordinary facility on the spot.
"It's extraordinary how all one's time is taken up here," he
thought, considering the second letter.  He felt himself to blame
for not having got done what his sister had asked him to do for
her.  "Today, again, I've not been to the court, but today I've
certainly not had time."  And resolving that he would not fail to
do it next day, he went up to his wife.  As he went in, Levin
rapidly ran through mentally the day he had spent.  All the
events of the day were conversations, conversations he had heard
and taken part in.  All the conversations were upon subjects
which, if he had been alone at home, he would never have taken
up, but here they were very interesting.  And all these
conversations were right enough, only in two places there was
something not quite right.  One was what he had said about the
carp, the other was something not "quite the thing" in the tender
sympathy he was feeling for Anna.

Levin found his wife low-spirited and dull.  The dinner of the
three sisters had gone off very well, but then they had waited
and waited for him, all of them had felt dull, the sisters had
departed, and she had been left alone.

"Well, and what have you been doing?" she asked him, looking
straight into his eyes, which shone with rather a suspicious
brightness.  But that she might not prevent his telling her
everything, she concealed her close scrutiny of him, and with an
approving smile listened to his account of how he had spent the
evening.

"Well, I'm very glad I met Vronsky.  I felt quite at ease and
natural with him.  You understand, I shall try not to see him,
but I'm glad that this awkwardness is all over," he said, and
remembering that by way of trying not to see him, he had
immediately gone to call on Anna, he blushed.  "We talk about the
peasants drinking; I don't know which drinks most, the peasantry
or our own class; the peasants do on holidays, but..."

But Kitty took not the slightest interest in discussing the
drinking habits of the peasants.  She saw that he blushed, and
she wanted to know why.

"Well, and then where did you go?"

"Stiva urged me awfully to go and see Anna Arkadyevna."

And as he said this, Levin blushed even more, and his doubts as
to whether he had done right in going to see Anna were settled
once for all.  He knew now that he ought not to have done so.

Kitty's eyes opened in a curious way and gleamed at Anna's name,
but controlling herself with an effort, she concealed her emotion
and deceived him.

"Oh!" was all she said.

"I'm sure you won't be angry at my going.  Stiva begged me to,
and Dolly wished it," Levin went on.

"Oh, no!" she said, but he saw in her eyes a constraint that
boded him no good.

"She is a very sweet, very, very unhappy, good woman," he said,
telling her about Anna, her occupations, and what she had told
him to say to her.

"Yes, of course, she is very much to be pitied," said Kitty, when
he had finished.  "Whom was your letter from?"

He told her, and believing in her calm tone, he went to change
his coat.

Coming back, he found Kitty in the same easy chair.  When he went
up to her, she glanced at him and broke into sobs.

"What? what is it?" he asked, knowing beforehand what.

"You're in love with that hateful woman; she has bewitched you!
I saw it in your eyes.  Yes, yes!  What can it all lead to?  You
were drinking at the club, drinking and gambling, and then you
went...to her of all people!  No, we must go away....  I shall go
away tomorrow."

It was a long while before Levin could soothe his wife.  At last
he succeeded in calming her, only by confessing that a feeling of
pity, in conjunction with the wine he had drunk, had been too
much for him, that he had succumbed to Anna's artful influence,
and that he would avoid her.  One thing he did with more
sincerity confess to was that living so long in Moscow, a life of
nothing but conversation, eating and drinking, he was
degenerating.  They talked till three o'clock in the morning.
Only at three o'clock were they sufficiently reconciled to be
able to go to sleep.



Chapter 12


After taking leave of her guests, Anna did not sit down, but
began walking up and down the room.  She had unconsciously the
whole evening done her utmost to arouse in Levin a feeling of
love--as of late she had fallen into doing with all young men--
and she knew she had attained her aim, as far as was possible in
one evening, with a married and conscientious man.  She liked him
indeed extremely, and, in spite of the striking difference, from
the masculine point of view, between Vronsky and Levin, as a
woman she saw something they had in common, which had made Kitty
able to love both.  Yet as soon as he was out of the room, she
ceased to think of him.

One thought, and one only, pursued her in different forms, and
refused to be shaken off.  "If I have so much effect on others,
on this man, who loves his home and his wife, why is it _he_ is
so cold to me?...not cold exactly, he loves me, I know that!  But
something new is drawing us apart now.  Why wasn't he here all
the evening?  He told Stiva to say he could not leave Yashvin,
and must watch over his play.  Is Yashvin a child?  But supposing
it's true.  He never tells a lie.  But there's something else in
it if it's true.  He is glad of an opportunity of showing me that
he has other duties; I know that, I submit to that.  But why
prove that to me?  He wants to show me that his love for me is
not to interfere with his freedom.  But I need no proofs, I need
love.  He ought to understand all the bitterness of this life for
me here in Moscow.  Is this life?  I am not living, but waiting
for an event, which is continually put off and put off.  No
answer again!  And Stiva says he cannot go to Alexey
Alexandrovitch.  And I can't write again.  I can do nothing, can
begin nothing, can alter nothing; I hold myself in, I wait,
inventing amusements for myself--the English family, writing,
reading--but it's all nothing but a sham, it's all the same as
morphine.  He ought to feel for me," she said, feeling tears of
self-pity coming into her eyes.

She heard Vronsky's abrupt ring and hurriedly dried her tears--
not only dried her tears, but sat down by a lamp and opened a
book, affecting composure.  She wanted to show him that she was
displeased that he had not come home as he had promised--
displeased only, and not on any account to let him see her
distress, and least of all, her self-pity.  She might pity
herself, but he must not pity her.  She did not want strife, she
blamed him for wanting to quarrel, but unconsciously put herself
into an attitude of antagonism.

"Well, you've not been dull?" he said, eagerly and
good-humoredly, going up to her.  "What a terrible passion it
is--gambling!"

"No, I've not been dull; I've learned long ago not to be dull.
Stiva has been here and Levin."

"Yes, they meant to come and see you.  Well, how did you like
Levin?" he said, sitting down beside her.

"Very much.  They have not long been gone.  What was Yashvin
doing?"

"He was winning--seventeen thousand.  I got him away.  He had
really started home, but he went back again, and now he's
losing."

"Then what did you stay for?" she asked, suddenly lifting her
eyes to him.  The expression of her face was cold and ungracious.
"You told Stiva you were staying on to get Yashvin away.  And you
have left him there."

The same expression of cold readiness for the conflict appeared
on his face too.

"In the first place, I did not ask him to give you any message;
and secondly, I never tell lies.  But what's the chief point, I
wanted to stay, and I stayed," he said, frowning.  "Anna, what
is it for, why will you?" he said after a moment's silence,
bending over towards her, and he opened his hand, hoping she
would lay hers in it.

She was glad of this appeal for tenderness.  But some strange
force of evil would not let her give herself up to her feelings,
as though the rules of warfare would not permit her to surrender.

"Of course you wanted to stay, and you stayed.  You do everything
you want to.  But what do you tell me that for?  With what
object?" she said, getting more and more excited.  "Does anyone
contest your rights?  But you want to be right, and you're
welcome to be right."

His hand closed, he turned away, and his face wore a still more
obstinate expression.

"For you it's a matter of obstinacy," she said, watching him
intently and suddenly finding the right word for that expression
that irritated her, "simply obstinacy.  For you it's a question
of whether you keep the upper hand of me, while for me...."
Again she felt sorry for herself, and she almost burst into
tears.  "If you knew what it is for me!  When I feel as I do now
that you are hostile, yes, hostile to me, if you knew what this
means for me!  If you knew how I feel on the brink of calamity at
this instant, how afraid I am of myself!" And she turned away,
hiding her sobs.

"But what are you talking about?" he said, horrified at her
expression of despair, and again bending over her, he took her
hand and kissed it.  "What is it for?  Do I seek amusements
outside our home?  Don't I avoid the society of women?"

"Well, yes!  If that were all!" she said.

"Come, tell me what I ought to do to give you peace of mind?  I
am ready to do anything to make you happy," he said, touched by
her expression of despair; "what wouldn't I do to save you from
distress of any sort, as now, Anna!" he said.

"It's nothing, nothing!" she said.  "I don't know myself whether
it's the solitary life, my nerves....  Come, don't let us talk
of it.  What about the race?  You haven't told me!" she inquired,
trying to conceal her triumph at the victory, which had anyway
been on her side.

He asked for supper, and began telling her about the races; but
in his tone, in his eyes, which became more and more cold, she
saw that he did not forgive her for her victory, that the feeling
of obstinacy with which she had been struggling had asserted
itself again in him.  He was colder to her than before, as though
he were regretting his surrender.  And she, remembering the words
that had given her the victory, "how I feel on the brink of
calamity, how afraid I am of myself," saw that this weapon was a
dangerous one, and that it could not be used a second time.  And
she felt that beside the love that bound them together there had
grown up between them some evil spirit of strife, which she could
not exorcise from his, and still less from her own heart.



Chapter 13


There are no conditions to which a man cannot become used,
especially if he sees that all around him are living in the same
way.  Levin could not have believed three months before that he
could have gone quietly to sleep in the condition in which he was
that day, that leading an aimless, irrational life, living too
beyond his means, after drinking to excess (he could not call
what happened at the club anything else), forming inappropriately
friendly relations with a man with whom his wife had once been in
love, and a still more inappropriate call upon a woman who could
only be called a lost woman, after being fascinated by that woman
and causing his wife distress--he could still go quietly to
sleep.  But under the influence of fatigue, a sleepless night,
and the wine he had drunk, his sleep was sound and untroubled.

At five o'clock the creak of a door opening waked him.  He jumped
up and looked round.  Kitty was not in bed beside him.  But there
was a light moving behind the screen, and he heard her steps.

"What is it?...what is it?" he said, half-asleep.  "Kitty!
What is it?"

"Nothing," she said, coming from behind the screen with a candle
in her hand.  "I felt unwell," she said, smiling a particularly
sweet and meaning smile.

"What? has it begun?" he said in terror.  "We ought to send..."
and hurriedly he reached after his clothes.

"No, no," she said, smiling and holding his hand.  "It's sure to
be nothing.  I was rather unwell, only a little.  It's all over
now."

And getting into bed, she blew out the candle, lay down and was
still.  Though he thought her stillness suspicious, as though she
were holding her breath, and still more suspicious the expression
of peculiar tenderness and excitement with which, as she came
from behind the screen, she said "nothing," he was so sleepy that
he fell asleep at once.  Only later he remembered the stillness
of her breathing, and understood all that must have been passing
in her sweet, precious heart while she lay beside him, not
stirring, in anticipation of the greatest event in a woman's
life.  At seven o'clock he was waked by the touch of her hand on
his shoulder, and a gentle whisper.  She seemed struggling
between regret at waking him, and the desire to talk to him.

"Kostya, don't be frightened.  It's all right.  But I fancy....
We ought to send for Lizaveta Petrovna."

The candle was lighted again.  She was sitting up in bed, holding
some knitting, which she had been busy upon during the last few
days.

"Please, don't be frightened, it's all right.  I'm not a bit
afraid," she said, seeing his scared face, and she pressed his
hand to her bosom and then to her lips.

He hurriedly jumped up, hardly awake, and kept his eyes fixed on
her, as he put on his dressing gown; then he stopped, still
looking at her.  He had to go, but he could not tear himself from
her eyes.  He thought he loved her face, knew her expression, her
eyes, but never had he seen it like this.  How hateful and
horrible he seemed to himself, thinking of the distress he had
caused her yesterday.  Her flushed face, fringed with soft
curling hair under her night cap, was radiant with joy and
courage.

Though there was so little that was complex or artificial in
Kitty's character in general, Levin was struck by what was
revealed now, when suddenly all disguises were thrown off and the
very kernel of her soul shone in her eyes.  And in this
simplicity and nakedness of her soul, she, the very woman he
loved in her, was more manifest than ever.  She looked at him,
smiling; but all at once her brows twitched, she threw up her
head, and going quickly up to him, clutched his hand and pressed
close up to him, breathing her hot breath upon him.  She was in
pain and was, as it were, complaining to him of her suffering.
And for the first minute, from habit, it seemed to him that he
was to blame.  But in her eyes there was a tenderness that told
him that she was far from reproaching him, that she loved him for
her sufferings.  "If not I, who is to blame for it?" he thought
unconsciously, seeking someone responsible for this suffering for
him to punish; but there was no one responsible.  She was
suffering, complaining, and triumphing in her sufferings, and
rejoicing in them, and loving them.  He saw that something
sublime was being accomplished in her soul, but what?  He could
not make it out.  It was beyond his understanding.

"I have sent to mamma.  You go quickly to fetch Lizaveta Petrovna
...Kostya!...  Nothing, it's over."

She moved away from him and rang the bell.

"Well, go now; Pasha's coming.  I am all right."

And Levin saw with astonishment that she had taken up the
knitting she had brought in in the night and begun working at it
again.

As Levin was going out of one door, he heard the maid-servant
come in at the other.  He stood at the door and heard Kitty
giving exact directions to the maid, and beginning to help her
move the bedstead.

He dressed, and while they were putting in his horses, as a hired
sledge was not to be seen yet, he ran again up to the bedroom,
not on tiptoe, it seemed to him, but on wings.  Two maid-servants
were carefully moving something in the bedroom.

Kitty was walking about knitting rapidly and giving directions.

"I'm going for the doctor.  They have sent for Lizaveta Petrovna,
but I'll go on there too.  Isn't there anything wanted?  Yes,
shall I go to Dolly's?"

She looked at him, obviously not hearing what he was saying.

"Yes, yes.  Do go," she said quickly, frowning and waving her
hand to him.

He had just gone into the drawing room, when suddenly a plaintive
moan sounded from the bedroom, smothered instantly.  He stood
still, and for a long while he could not understand.

"Yes, that is she," he said to himself, and clutching at his head
he ran downstairs.

"Lord have mercy on us! pardon us! aid us!" he repeated the words
that for some reason came suddenly to his lips.  And he, an
unbeliever, repeated these words not with his lips only.  At that
instant he knew that all his doubts, even the impossibility of
believing with his reason, of which he was aware in himself, did
not in the least hinder his turning to God.  All of that now
floated out of his soul like dust.  To whom was he to turn if not
to Him in whose hands he felt himself, his soul, and his love?

The horse was not yet ready, but feeling a peculiar concentration
of his physical forces and his intellect on what he had to do, he
started off on foot without waiting for the horse, and told
Kouzma to overtake him.

At the corner he met a night cabman driving hurriedly.  In the
little sledge, wrapped in a velvet cloak, sat Lizaveta Petrovna
with a kerchief round her head.  "Thank God! thank God!" he said,
overjoyed to recognize her little fair face which wore a
peculiarly serious, even stern expression.  Telling the driver
not to stop, he ran along beside her.

"For two hours, then?  Not more?" she inquired.  "You should let
Pyotr Dmitrievitch know, but don't hurry him.  And get some opium
at the chemist's."

"So you think that it may go on well?  Lord have mercy on us and
help us!" Levin said, seeing his own horse driving out of the
gate.  Jumping into the sledge beside Kouzma, he told him to
drive to the doctor's.



Chapter 14


The doctor was not yet up, and the footman said that "he had been
up late, and had given orders not to be waked, but would get up
soon."  The footman was cleaning the lamp-chimneys, and seemed
very busy about them.  This concentration of the footman upon his
lamps, and his indifference to what was passing in Levin, at
first astounded him, but immediately on considering the question
he realized that no one knew or was bound to know his feelings,
and that it was all the more necessary to act calmly, sensibly,
and resolutely to get through this wall of indifference and
attain his aim.

"Don't be in a hurry or let anything slip," Levin said to
himself, feeling a greater and greater flow of physical energy
and attention to all that lay before him to do.

Having ascertained that the doctor was not getting up, Levin
considered various plans, and decided on the following one: that
Kouzma should go for another doctor, while he himself should go
to the chemist's for opium, and if when he came back the doctor
had not yet begun to get up, he would either by tipping the
footman, or by force, wake the doctor at all hazards.

At the chemist's the lank shopman sealed up a packet of powders
for a coachman who stood waiting, and refused him opium with the
same callousness with which the doctor's footman had cleaned his
lamp chimneys.  Trying not to get flurried or out of temper,
Levin mentioned the names of the doctor and midwife, and
explaining what the opium was needed for, tried to persuade him.
The assistant inquired in German whether he should give it, and
receiving an affirmative reply from behind the partition, he took
out a bottle and a funnel, deliberately poured the opium from a
bigger bottle into a little one, stuck on a label, sealed it up,
in spite of Levin's request that he would not do so, and was
about to wrap it up too.  This was more than Levin could stand;
he took the bottle firmly out of his hands, and ran to the big
glass doors.  The doctor was not even now getting up, and the
footman, busy now in putting down the rugs, refused to wake him.
Levin deliberately took out a ten rouble note, and, careful to
speak slowly, though losing no time over the business, he handed
him the note, and explained that Pyotr Dmitrievitch (what a great
and important personage he seemed to Levin now, this Pyotr
Dmitrievitch, who had been of so little consequence in his eyes
before!) had promised to come at any time; that he would
certainly not be angry! and that he must therefore wake him at
once.

The footman agreed, and went upstairs, taking Levin into the
waiting room.

Levin could hear through the door the doctor coughing, moving
about, washing, and saying something.  Three minutes passed; it
seemed to Levin that more than an hour had gone by.  He could not
wait any longer.

"Pyotr Dmitrievitch, Pyotr Dmitrievitch!" he said in an imploring
voice at the open door.  "For God's sake, forgive me! See me as
you are.  It's been going on more than two hours already."

"In a minute; in a minute!" answered a voice, and to his
amazement Levin heard that the doctor was smiling as he spoke.

"For one instant."

"In a minute."

Two minutes more passed while the doctor was putting on his
boots, and two minutes more while the doctor put on his coat and
combed his hair.

"Pyotr Dmitrievitch!" Levin was beginning again in a plaintive
voice, just as the doctor came in dressed and ready.  "These
people have no conscience," thought Levin.  "Combing his hair,
while we're dying!"

"Good morning!" the doctor said to him, shaking hands, and, as it
were, teasing him with his composure.  "There's no hurry.  Well
now?"

Trying to be as accurate as possible, Levin began to tell him
every unnecessary detail of his wife's condition, interrupting
his account repeatedly with entreaties that the doctor would come
with him at once.

"Oh, you needn't be in any hurry.  You don't understand, you
know.  I'm certain I'm not wanted, still I've promised, and if
you like, I'll come.  But there's no hurry.  Please sit down;
won't you have some coffee?"

Levin stared at him with eyes that asked whether he was laughing
at him; but the doctor had no notion of making fun of him.

"I know, I know," the doctor said, smiling; "I'm a married man
myself; and at these moments we husbands are very much to be
pitied.  I've a patient whose husband always takes refuge in the
stables on such occasions."

"But what do you think, Pyotr Dmitrievitch?  Do you suppose it
may go all right?"

"Everything points to a favorable issue."

"So you'll come immediately?" said Levin, looking wrathfully at
the servant who was bringing in the coffee.

"In an hour's time."

"Oh, for mercy's sake!"

"Well, let me drink my coffee, anyway."

The doctor started upon his coffee.  Both were silent.

"The Turks are really getting beaten, though.  Did you read
yesterday's telegrams?" said the doctor, munching some roll.

"No, I can't stand it!" said Levin, jumping up.  "So you'll be
with us in a quarter of an hour."

"In half an hour."

"On your honor?"

When Levin got home, he drove up at the same time as the
princess, and they went up to the bedroom door together.  The
princess had tears in her eyes, and her hands were shaking.
Seeing Levin, she embraced him, and burst into tears.

"Well, my dear Lizaveta Petrovna?" she queried, clasping the hand
of the midwife, who came out to meet them with a beaming and
anxious face.

"She's going on well," she said; "persuade her to lie down.  She
will be easier so."

From the moment when he had waked up and understood what was
going on, Levin had prepared his mind to bear resolutely what was
before him, and without considering or anticipating anything, to
avoid upsetting his wife, and on the contrary to soothe her and
keep up her courage.  Without allowing himself even to think of
what was to come, of how it would end, judging from his inquiries
as to the usual duration of these ordeals, Levin had in his
imagination braced himself to bear up and to keep a tight rein on
his feelings for five hours, and it had seemed to him he could do
this.  But when he came back from the doctor's and saw her
sufferings again, he fell to repeating more and more frequently:
"Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!" He sighed, and flung his
head up, and began to feel afraid he could not bear it, that he
would burst into tears or run away.  Such agony it was to him.
And only one hour had passed.

But after that hour there passed another hour, two hours, three,
the full five hours he had fixed as the furthest limit of his
sufferings, and the position was still unchanged; and he was
still bearing it because there was nothing to be done but bear
it; every instant feeling that he had reached the utmost limits
of his endurance, and that his heart would break with sympathy
and pain.

But still the minutes passed by and the hours, and still hours
more, and his misery and horror grew and were more and more
intense.

All the ordinary conditions of life, without which one can form
no conception of anything, had ceased to exist for Levin.  He
lost all sense of time.  Minutes--those minutes when she sent for
him and he held her moist hand, that would squeeze his hand with
extraordinary violence and then push it away--seemed to him
hours, and hours seemed to him minutes.  He was surprised when
Lizaveta Petrovna asked him to light a candle behind a screen,
and he found that it was five o'clock in the afternoon.  If he
had been told it was only ten o'clock in the morning, he would not
have been more surprised.  Where he was all this time, he knew as
little as the time of anything.  He saw her swollen face,
sometimes bewildered and in agony, sometimes smiling and trying
to reassure him.  He saw the old princess too, flushed and
overwrought, with her gray curls in disorder, forcing herself to
gulp down her tears, biting her lips; he saw Dolly too and the
doctor, smoking fat cigarettes, and Lizaveta Petrovna with a
firm, resolute, reassuring face, and the old prince walking up
and down the hall with a frowning face.  But why they came in and
went out, where they were, he did not know.  The princess was
with the doctor in the bedroom, then in the study, where a table
set for dinner suddenly appeared; then she was not there, but
Dolly was.  Then Levin remembered he had been sent somewhere.
Once he had been sent to move a table and sofa.  He had done this
eagerly, thinking it had to be done for her sake, and only later
on he found it was his own bed he had been getting ready.  Then
he had been sent to the study to ask the doctor something.  The
doctor had answered and then had said something about the
irregularities in the municipal council.  Then he had been sent
to the bedroom to help the old princess to move the holy picture
in its silver and gold setting, and with the princess's old
waiting maid he had clambered on a shelf to reach it and had
broken the little lamp, and the old servant had tried to reassure
him about the lamp and about his wife, and he carried the holy
picture and set it at Kitty's head, carefully tucking it in
behind the pillow.  But where, when, and why all this had
happened, he could not tell.  He did not understand why the old
princess took his hand, and looking compassionately at him,
begged him not to worry himself, and Dolly persuaded him to eat
something and led him out of the room, and even the doctor looked
seriously and with commiseration at him and offered him a drop of
something.

All he knew and felt was that what was happening was what had
happened nearly a year before in the hotel of the country town at
the deathbed of his brother Nikolay.  But that had been grief--
this was joy.  Yet that grief and this joy were alike outside all
the ordinary conditions of life; they were loop-holes, as it were,
in that ordinary life through which there came glimpses of
something sublime.  And in the contemplation of this sublime
something the soul was exalted to inconceivable heights of which
it had before had no conception, while reason lagged behind,
unable to keep up with it.

"Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!" he repeated to himself
incessantly, feeling, in spite of his long and, as it seemed,
complete alienation from religion, that he turned to God just as
trustfully and simply as he had in his childhood and first youth.

All this time he had two distinct spiritual conditions.  One was
away from her, with the doctor, who kept smoking one fat
cigarette after another and extinguishing them on the edge of a
full ash tray, with Dolly, and with the old prince, where there
was talk about dinner, about politics, about Marya Petrovna's
illness, and where Levin suddenly forgot for a minute what was
happening, and felt as though he had waked up from sleep; the
other was in her presence, at her pillow, where his heart seemed
breaking and still did not break from sympathetic suffering, and
he prayed to God without ceasing.  And every time he was brought
back from a moment of oblivion by a scream reaching him from the
bedroom, he fell into the same strange terror that had come upon
him the first minute.  Every time he heard a shriek, he jumped
up, ran to justify himself, remembered on the way that he was not
to blame, and he longed to defend her, to help her.  But as he
looked at her, he saw again that help was impossible, and he was
filled with terror and prayed: "Lord, have mercy on us, and help
us!"  And as time went on, both these conditions became more
intense; the calmer he became away from her, completely
forgetting her, the more agonizing became both her sufferings and
his feeling of helplessness before them.  He jumped up, would
have liked to run away, but ran to her.

Sometimes, when again and again she called upon him, he blamed
her; but seeing her patient, smiling face, and hearing the words,
"I am worrying you," he threw the blame on God; but thinking of
God, at once he fell to beseeching God to forgive him and have
mercy.




Chapter 15


He did not know whether it was late or early.  The candles had
all burned out.  Dolly had just been in the study and had
suggested to the doctor that he should lie down.  Levin sat
listening to the doctor's stories of a quack mesmerizer and
looking at the ashes of his cigarette.  There had been a period
of repose, and he had sunk into oblivion.  He had completely
forgotten what was going on now.  He heard the doctor's chat and
understood it.  Suddenly there came an unearthly shriek.  The
shriek was so awful that Levin did not even jump up, but holding
his breath, gazed in terrified inquiry at the doctor.  The doctor
put his head on one side, listened, and smiled approvingly.
Everything was so extraordinary that nothing could strike Levin
as strange.  "I suppose it must be so," he thought, and still sat
where he was.  Whose scream was this?  He jumped up, ran on
tiptoe to the bedroom, edged round Lizaveta Petrovna and the
princess, and took up his position at Kitty's pillow.  The scream
had subsided, but there was some change now.  What it was he did
not see and did not comprehend, and he had no wish to see or
comprehend.  But he saw it by the face of Lizaveta Petrovna.
Lizaveta Petrovna's face was stern and pale, and still as
resolute, though her jaws were twitching, and her eyes were fixed
intently on Kitty.  Kitty's swollen and agonized face, a tress of
hair clinging to her moist brow, was turned to him and sought his
eyes.  Her lifted hands asked for his hands.  Clutching his chill
hands in her moist ones, she began squeezing them to her face.

"Don't go, don't go!  I'm not afraid, I'm not afraid!" she said
rapidly.  "Mamma, take my earrings.  They bother me.  You're not
afraid?  Quick, quick, Lizaveta Petrovna..."

She spoke quickly, very quickly, and tried to smile.  But
suddenly her face was drawn, she pushed him away.

"Oh, this is awful!  I'm dying, I'm dying!  Go away!" she
shrieked, and again he heard that unearthly scream.

Levin clutched at his head and ran out of the room.

"It's nothing, it's nothing, it's all right," Dolly called after
him.

But they might say what they liked, he knew now that all was
over.  He stood in the next room, his head leaning against the
door post, and heard shrieks, howls such as he had never heard
before, and he knew that what had been Kitty was uttering these
shrieks.  He had long ago ceased to wish for the child.  By now
he loathed this child.  He did not even wish for her life now,
all he longed for was the end of this awful anguish.

"Doctor! What is it?  What is it?  By God!" he said, snatching at
the doctor's hand as he came up.

"It's the end," said the doctor.  And the doctor's face was so
grave as he said it that Levin took _the end_ as meaning her death.

Beside himself, he ran into the bedroom.  The first thing he saw
was the face of Lizaveta Petrovna.  It was even more frowning and
stern.  Kitty's face he did not know.  In the place where it had
been was something that was fearful in its strained distortion
and in the sounds that came from it.  He fell down with his head
on the wooden framework of the bed, feeling that his heart was
bursting.  The awful scream never paused, it became still more
awful, and as though it had reached the utmost limit of terror,
suddenly it ceased.  Levin could not believe his ears, but there
could be no doubt; the scream had ceased and he heard a subdued
stir and bustle, and hurried breathing, and her voice, gasping,
alive, tender, and blissful, uttered softly, "It's over!"

He lifted his head.  With her hands hanging exhausted on the
quilt, looking extraordinarily lovely and serene, she looked at
him in silence and tried to smile, and could not.

And suddenly, from the mysterious and awful far-away world in
which he had been living for the last twenty-two hours, Levin
felt himself all in an instant borne back to the old every-day
world, glorified though now, by such a radiance of happiness that
he could not bear it.  The strained chords snapped, sobs and
tears of joy which he had never foreseen rose up with such
violence that his whole body shook, that for long they prevented
him from speaking.

Falling on his knees before the bed, he held his wife's hand
before his lips and kissed it, and the hand, with a weak movement
of the fingers, responded to his kiss.  And meanwhile, there at
the foot of the bed, in the deft hands of Lizaveta Petrovna, like
a flickering light in a lamp, lay the life of a human creature,
which had never existed before, and which would now with the same
right, with the same importance to itself, live and create in its
own image.

"Alive! alive!  And a boy too!  Set your mind at rest!" Levin
heard Lizaveta Petrovna saying, as she slapped the baby's back
with a shaking hand.

"Mamma, is it true?" said Kitty's voice.

The princess's sobs were all the answers she could make.  And in
the midst of the silence there came in unmistakable reply to the
mother's question, a voice quite unlike the subdued voices
speaking in the room.  It was the bold, clamorous, self-assertive
squall of the new human being, who had so incomprehensibly
appeared.

If Levin had been told before that Kitty was dead, and that he
had died with her, and that their children were angels, and that
God was standing before him, he would have been surprised at
nothing.  But now, coming back to the world of reality, he had to
make great mental efforts to take in that she was alive and well,
and that the creature squalling so desperately was his son.
Kitty was alive, her agony was over.  And he was unutterably
happy.  That he understood; he was completely happy in it.  But
the baby?  Whence, why, who was he?...  He could not get used to
the idea.  It seemed to him something extraneous, superfluous, to
which he could not accustom himself.



Chapter 16


At ten o'clock the old prince, Sergey Ivanovitch, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch were sitting at Levin's.  Having inquired after
Kitty, they had dropped into conversation upon other subjects.
Levin heard them, and unconsciously, as they talked, going over
the past, over what had been up to that morning, he thought of
himself as he had been yesterday till that point.  It was as
though a hundred years had passed since then.  He felt himself
exalted to unattainable heights, from which he studiously lowered
himself so as not to wound the people he was talking to.  He
talked, and was all the time thinking of his wife, of her
condition now, of his son, in whose existence he tried to school
himself into believing.  The whole world of woman, which had
taken for him since his marriage a new value he had never
suspected before, was now so exalted that he could not take it in
in his imagination.  He heard them talk of yesterday's dinner at
the club, and thought: "What is happening with her now?  Is she
asleep?  How is she?  What is she thinking of?  Is he crying, my
son Dmitri?"  And in the middle of the conversation, in the
middle of a sentence, he jumped up and went out of the room.

"Send me word if I can see her," said the prince.

"Very well, in a minute," answered Levin, and without stopping,
he went to her room.

She was not asleep, she was talking gently with her mother,
making plans about the christening.

Carefully set to rights, with hair well-brushed, in a smart
little cap with some blue in it, her arms out on the quilt, she
was lying on her back.  Meeting his eyes, her eyes drew him to
her.  Her face, bright before, brightened still more as he drew
near her.  There was the same change in it from earthly to
unearthly that is seen in the face of the dead.  But then it
means farewell, here it meant welcome.  Again a rush of emotion,
such as he had felt at the moment of the child's birth, flooded
his heart.  She took his hand and asked him if he had slept.  He
could not answer, and turned away, struggling with his weakness.

"I have had a nap, Kostya!" she said to him; "and I am so
comfortable now."

She looked at him, but suddenly her expression changed.

"Give him to me," she said, hearing the baby's cry.  "Give him to
me, Lizaveta Petrovna, and he shall look at him."

"To be sure, his papa shall look at him," said Lizaveta Petrovna,
getting up and bringing something red, and queer, and wriggling.
"Wait a minute, we'll make him tidy first," and Lizaveta
Petrovna laid the red wobbling thing on the bed, began untrussing
and trussing up the baby, lifting it up and turning it over with
one finger and powdering it with something.

Levin, looking at the tiny, pitiful creature, made strenuous
efforts to discover in his heart some traces of fatherly feeling
for it.  He felt nothing towards it but disgust.  But when it was
undressed and he caught a glimpse of wee, wee, little hands,
little feet, saffron-colored, with little toes, too, and
positively with a little big toe different from the rest, and
when he saw Lizaveta Petrovna closing the wide-open little hands,
as though they were soft springs, and putting them into linen
garments, such pity for the little creature came upon him, and
such terror that she would hurt it, that he held her hand back.

Lizaveta Petrovna laughed.

"Don't be frightened, don't be frightened!"

When the baby had been put to rights and transformed into a firm
doll, Lizaveta Petrovna dandled it as though proud of her
handiwork, and stood a little away so that Levin might see his
son in all his glory.

Kitty looked sideways in the same direction, never taking her
eyes off the baby.  "Give him to me! give him to me!" she said,
and even made as though she would sit up.

"What are you thinking of, Katerina Alexandrovna, you mustn't
move like that!  Wait a minute.  I'll give him to you.  Here
we're showing papa what a fine fellow we are!"

And Lizaveta Petrovna, with one hand supporting the wobbling
head, lifted up on the other arm the strange, limp, red creature,
whose head was lost in its swaddling clothes.  But it had a nose,
too, and slanting eyes and smacking lips.

"A splendid baby!" said Lizaveta Petrovna.

Levin sighed with mortification.  This splendid baby excited in
him no feeling but disgust and compassion.  It was not at all the
feeling he had looked forward to.

He turned away while Lizaveta Petrovna put the baby to the
unaccustomed breast.

Suddenly laughter made him look round.  The baby had taken the
breast.

"Come, that's enough, that's enough!" said Lizaveta Petrovna, but
Kitty would not let the baby go.  He fell asleep in her arms.

"Look, now," said Kitty, turning the baby so that he could see
it.  The aged-looking little face suddenly puckered up still more
and the baby sneezed.

Smiling, hardly able to restrain his tears, Levin kissed his wife
and went out of the dark room.  What he felt towards this little
creature was utterly unlike what he had expected.  There was
nothing cheerful and joyous in the feeling; on the contrary, it
was a new torture of apprehension.  It was the consciousness of a
new sphere of liability to pain.  And this sense was so painful
at first, the apprehension lest this helpless creature should
suffer was so intense, that it prevented him from noticing the
strange thrill of senseless joy and even pride that he had felt
when the baby sneezed.



Chapter 17


Stepan Arkadyevitch's affairs were in a very bad way.

The money for two-thirds of the forest had all been spent
already, and he had borrowed from the merchant in advance at ten
per cent discount, almost all the remaining third.  The  merchant
would not give more, especially as Darya Alexandrovna, for the
first time that winter insisting on her right to her own
property, had refused to sign the receipt for the payment of the
last third of the forest.  All his salary went on household
expenses and in payment of petty debts that could not be put off.
There was positively no money.

This was unpleasant and awkward, and in Stepan Arkadyevitch's
opinion things could not go on like this.  The explanation of the
position was, in his view, to be found in the fact that his
salary was too small.  The post he filled had been unmistakably
very good five years ago, but it was so no longer.

Petrov, the bank director, had twelve thousand; Sventitsky, a
company director, had seventeen thousand; Mitin, who had founded
a bank, received fifty thousand.

"Clearly I've been napping, and they've overlooked me," Stepan
Arkadyevitch thought about himself.  And he began keeping his
eyes and ears open, and towards the end of the winter he had
discovered a very good berth and had formed a plan of attack upon
it, at first from Moscow through aunts, uncles, and friends, and
then, when the matter was well advanced, in the spring, he went
himself to Petersburg.  It was one of those snug, lucrative
berths of which there are so many more nowadays than there used
to be, with incomes ranging from one thousand to fifty thousand
roubles.  It was the post of secretary of the committee of the
amalgamated agency of the southern railways, and of certain
banking companies.  This position, like all such appointments,
called for such immense energy and such varied qualifications,
that it was difficult for them to be found united in any one man.
And since a man combining all the qualifications was not to be
found, it was at least better that the post be filled by an
honest than by a dishonest man.  And Stepan Arkadyevitch was not
merely an honest man--unemphatically--in the common acceptation
of the words, he was an honest man--emphatically--in that special
sense which the word has in Moscow, when they talk of an "honest"
politician, an "honest" writer, an "honest" newspaper, an
"honest" institution, an "honest" tendency, meaning not simply
that the man or the institution is not dishonest, but that they
are capable on occasion of taking a line of their own in
opposition to the authorities.

Stepan Arkadyevitch moved in those circles in Moscow in which
that expression had come into use, was regarded there as an
honest man, and so had more right to this appointment than
others.

The appointment yielded an income of from seven to ten thousand a
year, and Oblonsky could fill it without giving up his government
position.  It was in the hands of two ministers, one lady, and
two Jews, and all these people, though the way had been paved
already with them, Stepan Arkadyevitch had to see in Petersburg.
Besides this business, Stepan Arkadyevitch had promised his
sister Anna to obtain from Karenin a definite answer on the
question of divorce.  And begging fifty roubles from Dolly, he
set off for Petersburg.

Stepan Arkadyevitch sat in Karenin's study listening to his
report on the causes of the unsatisfactory position of Russian
finance, and only waiting for the moment when he would finish to
speak about his own business or about Anna.

"Yes, that's very true," he said, when Alexey Alexandrovitch took
off the pince-nez, without which he could not read now, and
looked inquiringly at his former brother-in-law, "that's very
true in particular cases, but still the principle of our day is
freedom."

"Yes, but I lay down another principle, embracing the principle
of freedom," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, with emphasis on the
word "embracing," and he put on his pince-nez again, so as to
read the passage in which this statement was made.  And turning
over the beautifully written, wide-margined manuscript, Alexey
Alexandrovitch read aloud over again the conclusive passage.

"I don't advocate protection for the sake of private interests,
but for the public weal, and for the lower and upper classes
equally," he said, looking over his pince-nez at Oblonsky.  "But
_they_ cannot grasp that, _they_ are taken up now with personal
interests, and carried away by phrases."

Stepan Arkadyevitch knew that when Karenin began to talk of what
_they_ were doing and thinking, the persons who would not accept
his report and were the cause of everything wrong in Russia, that
it was coming near the end.  And so now he eagerly abandoned the
principle of free-trade, and fully agreed.  Alexey Alexandrovitch
paused, thoughtfully turning over the pages of his manuscript.

"Oh, by the way," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, "I wanted to ask
you, some time when you see Pomorsky, to drop him a hint that I
should be very glad to get that new appointment of secretary of
the committee of the amalgamated agency of the southern railways
and banking companies."  Stepan Arkadyevitch was familiar by now
with the title of the post he coveted, and he brought it out
rapidly without mistake.

Alexey Alexandrovitch questioned him as to the duties of this new
committee, and pondered.  He was considering whether the new
committee would not be acting in some way contrary to the views
he had been advocating.  But as the influence of the new
committee was of a very complex nature, and his views were of
very wide application, he could not decide this straight off, and
taking off his pince-nez, he said:

"Of course, I can mention it to him; but what is your reason
precisely for wishing to obtain the appointment?"

"It's a good salary, rising to nine thousand, and my means..."

"Nine thousand!" repeated Alexey Alexandrovitch, and he frowned.
The high figure of the salary made him reflect that on that side
Stepan Arkadyevitch's proposed position ran counter to the main
tendency of his own projects of reform, which always leaned
towards economy.

"I consider, and I have embodied my views in a note on the
subject, that in our day these immense salaries are evidence of
the unsound economic _assiette_ of our finances."

"But what's to be done?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "Suppose a
bank director gets ten thousand--well, he's worth it; or an
engineer gets twenty thousand--after all, it's a growing thing,
you know!"

"I assume that a salary is the price paid for a commodity, and it
ought to conform with the law of supply and demand.  If the
salary is fixed without any regard for that law, as, for
instance, when I see two engineers leaving college together, both
equally well trained and efficient, and one getting forty
thousand while the other is satisfied with two; or when I see
lawyers and hussars, having no special qualifications, appointed
directors of banking companies with immense salaries, I conclude
that the salary is not fixed in accordance with the law of supply
and demand, but simply through personal interest.  And this is an
abuse of great gravity in itself, and one that reacts injuriously
on the government service.  I consider..."

Stepan Arkadyevitch made haste to interrupt his brother-in-law.

"Yes; but you must agree that it's a new institution of undoubted
utility that's being started.  After all, you know, it's a
growing thing!  What they lay particular stress on is the thing
being carried on honestly," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with
emphasis.

But the Moscow significance of the word "honest" was lost on
Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Honesty is only a negative qualification," he said.

"Well, you'll do me a great service, anyway," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, "by putting in a word to Pomorsky--just in the way
of conversation...."

"But I fancy it's more in Volgarinov's hands," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

"Volgarinov has fully assented, as far as he's concerned," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, turning red.  Stepan Arkadyevitch reddened
at the mention of that name, because he had been that morning at
the Jew Volgarinov's, and the visit had left an unpleasant
recollection.

Stepan Arkadyevitch believed most positively that the committee
in which he was trying to get an appointment was a new, genuine,
and honest public body, but that morning when Volgarinov had--
intentionally, beyond a doubt--kept him two hours waiting with
other petitioners in his waiting room, he had suddenly felt
uneasy.

Whether he was uncomfortable that he, a descendant of Rurik,
Prince Oblonsky, had been kept for two hours waiting to see a
Jew, or that for the first time in his life he was not following
the example of his ancestors in serving the government, but was
turning off into a new career, anyway he was very uncomfortable.
During those two hours in Volgarinov's waiting room Stepan
Arkadyevitch, stepping jauntily about the room, pulling his
whiskers, entering into conversation with the other petitioners,
and inventing an epigram on his position, assiduously concealed
from others, and even from himself, the feeling he was
experiencing.

But all the time he was uncomfortable and angry, he could not
have said why--whether because he could not get his epigram just
right, or from some other reason.  When at last Volgarinov had
received him with exaggerated politeness and unmistakable triumph
at his humiliation, and had all but refused the favor asked of
him, Stepan Arkadyevitch had made haste to forget it all as soon
as possible.  And now, at the mere recollection, he blushed.



Chapter 18


"Now there is something I want to talk about, and you know what
it is.  About Anna," Stepan Arkadyevitch said, pausing for a
brief space, and shaking off the unpleasant impression.

As soon as Oblonsky uttered Anna's name, the face of Alexey
Alexandrovitch was completely transformed; all the life was gone
out of it, and it looked weary and dead.

"What is it exactly that you want from me?" he said, moving in
his chair and snapping his pince-nez.

"A definite settlement, Alexey Alexandrovitch, some settlement of
the position.  I'm appealing to you" ("not as an injured
husband," Stepan Arkadyevitch was going to say, but afraid of
wrecking his negotiation by this, he changed the words) "not as a
statesman" (which did not sound _à propos_), "but simply as a man,
and a good-hearted man and a Christian.  You must have pity on
her," he said.

"That is, in what way precisely?" Karenin said softly.

"Yes, pity on her.  If you had seen her as I have!--I have been
spending all the winter with her--you would have pity on her.
Her position is awful, simply awful!"

"I had imagined," answered Alexey Alexandrovitch in a higher,
almost shrill voice, "that Anna Arkadyevna had everything she had
desired for herself."

"Oh, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for heaven's sake, don't let us
indulge in recriminations!  What is past is past, and you know
what she wants and is waiting for--divorce."

"But I believe Anna Arkadyevna refuses a divorce, if I make it a
condition to leave me my son.  I replied in that sense, and
supposed that the matter was ended.  I consider it at an end,"
shrieked Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"But, for heaven's sake, don't get hot!" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, touching his brother-in-law's knee.  "The matter is
not ended.  If you will allow me to recapitulate, it was like
this: when you parted, you were as magnanimous as could possibly
be; you were ready to give her everything--freedom, divorce even.
She appreciated that.  No, don't think that.  She did appreciate
it--to such a degree that at the first moment, feeling how she
had wronged you, she did not consider and could not consider
everything.  She gave up everything.  But experience, time, have
shown that her position is unbearable, impossible."

"The life of Anna Arkadyevna can have no interest for me," Alexey
Alexandrovitch put in, lifting his eyebrows.

"Allow me to disbelieve that," Stepan Arkadyevitch replied
gently.  "Her position is intolerable for her, and of no benefit
to anyone whatever.  She has deserved it, you will say.  She
knows that and asks you for nothing; she says plainly that she
dare not ask you.  But I, all of us, her relatives, all who love
her, beg you, entreat you.  Why should she suffer?  Who is any
the better for it?"

"Excuse me, you seem to put me in the position of the guilty
party," observed Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Oh, no, oh, no, not at all! please understand me," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, touching his hand again, as though feeling sure
this physical contact would soften his brother-in-law.  "All I
say is this: her position is intolerable, and it might be
alleviated by you, and you will lose nothing by it.  I will
arrange it all for you, so that you'll not notice it.  You did
promise it, you know."

"The promise was given before.  And I had supposed that the
question of my son had settled the matter.  Besides, I had hoped
that Anna Arkadyevna had enough generosity..." Alexey
Alexandrovitch articulated with difficulty, his lips twitching
and his face white.

"She leaves it all to your generosity.  She begs, she implores
one thing of you--to extricate her from the impossible position
in which she is placed.  She does not ask for her son now.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are a good man.  Put yourself in her
position for a minute.  The question of divorce for her in her
position is a question of life and death.  If you had not
promised it once, she would have reconciled herself to her
position, she would have gone on living in the country.  But you
promised it, and she wrote to you, and moved to Moscow.  And here
she's been for six months in Moscow, where every chance meeting
cuts her to the heart, every day expecting an answer.  Why, it's
like keeping a condemned criminal for six months with the rope
round his neck, promising him perhaps death, perhaps mercy.  Have
pity on her, and I will undertake to arrange everything.  _Vos
scrupules_..."

"I am not talking about that, about that..." Alexey
Alexandrovitch interrupted with disgust.  "But, perhaps, I
promised what I had no right to promise."

"So you go back from your promise?"

"I have never refused to do all that is possible, but I want time
to consider how much of what I promised is possible."

"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch!" cried Oblonsky, jumping up, "I won't
believe that!  She's unhappy as only an unhappy woman can be, and
you cannot refuse in such..."

"As much of what I promised as is possible.  _Vous professez
d'être libre penseur._  But I as a believer cannot, in a matter of
such gravity, act in opposition to the Christian law."

"But in Christian societies and among us, as far as I'm aware,
divorce is allowed," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "Divorce is
sanctioned even by our church.  And we see..."

"It is allowed, but not in the sense..."

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are not like yourself," said
Oblonsky, after a brief pause.  "Wasn't it you (and didn't we all
appreciate it in you?) who forgave everything, and moved simply
by Christian feeling was ready to make any sacrifice?  You said
yourself: if a man take thy coat, give him thy cloak also, and
now..."

"I beg," said Alexey Alexandrovitch shrilly, getting suddenly
onto his feet, his face white and his jaws twitching, "I beg you
to drop this...to drop...this subject!"

"Oh, no!  Oh, forgive me, forgive me if I have wounded you," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, holding out his hand with a smile of
embarrassment; "but like a messenger I have simply performed the
commission given me."

Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, pondered a little, and
said:

"I must think it over and seek for guidance.  The day after
tomorrow I will give you a final answer," he said, after
considering a moment.



Chapter 19


Stepan Arkadyevitch was about to go away when Korney came in to
announce:

"Sergey Alexyevitch!"

"Who's Sergey Alexyevitch?" Stepan Arkadyevitch was beginning,
but he remembered immediately.

"Ah, Seryozha!" he said aloud.  "Sergey Alexyevitch!  I thought it
was the director of a department.  Anna asked me to see him too,"
he thought.

And he recalled the timid, piteous expression with which Anna had
said to him at parting: "Anyway, you will see him.  Find out
exactly where he is, who is looking after him.  And Stiva...if
it were possible!  Could it be possible?" Stepan Arkadyevitch
knew what was meant by that "if it were possible,"--if it were
possible to arrange the divorce so as to let her have her son....
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw now that it was no good to dream of that,
but still he was glad to see his nephew.

Alexey Alexandrovitch reminded his brother-in-law that they never
spoke to the boy of his mother, and he begged him not to mention
a single word about her.

"He was very ill after that interview with his mother, which we
had not foreseen," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.  "Indeed, we
feared for his life.  But with rational treatment, and
sea-bathing in the summer, he regained his strength, and now, by
the doctor's advice, I have let him go to school.  And certainly
the companionship of school has had a good effect on him, and he
is perfectly well, and making good progress."

"What a fine fellow he's grown!  He's not Seryozha now, but quite
full-fledged Sergey Alexyevitch!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
smiling, as he looked at the handsome, broad-shouldered lad in
blue coat and long trousers, who walked in alertly and
confidently.  The boy looked healthy and good-humored.  He bowed
to his uncle as to a stranger, but recognizing him, he blushed
and turned hurriedly away from him, as though offended and
irritated at something.  The boy went up to his father and handed
him a note of the marks he had gained in school.

"Well, that's very fair," said his father, "you can go."

"He's thinner and taller, and has grown out of being a child into
a boy; I like that," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "Do you remember
me?"

The boy looked back quickly at his uncle.

"Yes, _mon oncle_," he answered, glancing at his father, and
again he looked downcast.

His uncle called him to him, and took his hand.

"Well, and how are you getting on?" he said, wanting to talk to
him, and not knowing what to say.

The boy, blushing and making no answer, cautiously drew his hand
away.  As soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch let go his hand, he glanced
doubtfully at his father, and like a bird set free, he darted out
of the room.

A year had passed since the last time Seryozha had seen his
mother.  Since then he had heard nothing more of her.  And in the
course of that year he had gone to school, and made friends among
his schoolfellows.  The dreams and memories of his mother, which
had made him ill after seeing her, did not occupy his thoughts
now.  When they came back to him, he studiously drove them away,
regarding them as shameful and girlish, below the dignity of a
boy and a schoolboy.  He knew that his father and mother were
separated by some quarrel, he knew that he had to remain with his
father, and he tried to get used to that idea.

He disliked seeing his uncle, so like his mother, for it called
up those memories of which he was ashamed.  He disliked it all
the more as from some words he had caught as he waited at the
study door, and still more from the faces of his father and
uncle, he guessed that they must have been talking of his mother.
And to avoid condemning the father with whom he lived and on whom
he was dependent, and, above all, to avoid giving way to
sentimentality, which he considered so degrading, Seryozha tried
not to look at his uncle who had come to disturb his peace of
mind, and not to think of what he recalled to him.

But when Stepan Arkadyevitch, going out after him, saw him on the
stairs, and calling to him, asked him how he spent his playtime
at school, Seryozha talked more freely to him away from his
father's presence.

"We have a railway now," he said in answer to his uncle's
question.  "It's like this, do you see: two sit on a bench--
they're the passengers; and one stands up straight on the bench.
And all are harnessed to it by their arms or by their belts, and
they run through all the rooms--the doors are left open
beforehand.  Well, and it's pretty hard work being the
conductor!"

"That's the one that stands?" Stepan Arkadyevitch inquired,
smiling.

"Yes, you want pluck for it, and cleverness too, especially when
they stop all of a sudden, or someone falls down."

"Yes, that must be a serious matter," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
watching with mournful interest the eager eyes, like his
mother's; not childish now--no longer fully innocent.  And though
he had promised Alexey Alexandrovitch not to speak of Anna, he
could not restrain himself.

"Do you remember your mother?" he asked suddenly.

"No, I don't," Seryozha said quickly.  He blushed crimson, and
his face clouded over.  And his uncle could get nothing more out
of him.  His tutor found his pupil on the staircase half an hour
later, and for a long while he could not make out whether he was
ill-tempered or crying.

"What is it? I expect you hurt yourself when you fell down?"
said the tutor.  "I told you it was a dangerous game.  And we
shall have to speak to the director."

"If I had hurt myself, nobody should have found it out, that's
certain."

"Well, what is it, then?"

"Leave me alone!  If I remember, or if I don't remember?...what
business is it of his?  Why should I remember?  Leave me in
peace!" he said, addressing not his tutor, but the whole world.



Chapter 20


Stepan Arkadyevitch, as usual, did not waste his time in
Petersburg.  In Petersburg, besides business, his sister's
divorce, and his coveted appointment, he wanted, as he always
did, to freshen himself up, as he said, after the mustiness of
Moscow.

In spite of its _cafés chantants_ and its omnibuses, Moscow was
yet a stagnant bog.  Stepan Arkadyevitch always felt it.  After
living for some time in Moscow, especially in close relations
with his family, he was conscious of a depression of spirits.
After being a long time in Moscow without a change, he reached a
point when he positively began to be worrying himself over his
wife's ill-humor and reproaches, over his children's health and
education, and the petty details of his official work; even the
fact of being in debt worried him.  But he had only to go and
stay a little while in Petersburg, in the circle there in which
he moved, where people lived--really lived--instead of vegetating
as in Moscow, and all such ideas vanished and melted away at
once, like wax before the fire.  His wife?...  Only that day he
had been talking to Prince Tchetchensky.  Prince Tchetchensky had
a wife and family, grown-up pages in the corps,...and he had
another illegitimate family of children also.  Though the first
family was very nice too, Prince Tchetchensky felt happier in his
second family; and he used to take his eldest son with him to
his second family, and told Stepan Arkadyevitch that he thought
it good for his son, enlarging his ideas.  What would have been
said to that in Moscow?

His children?  In Petersburg children did not prevent their
parents from enjoying life.  The children were brought up in
schools, and there was no trace of the wild idea that prevailed
in Moscow, in Lvov's household, for instance, that all the
luxuries of life were for the children, while the parents have
nothing but work and anxiety.  Here people understood that a man
is in duty bound to live for himself, as every man of culture
should live.

His official duties?  Official work here was not the stiff,
hopeless drudgery that it was in Moscow.  Here there was some
interest in official life.  A chance meeting, a service rendered,
a happy phrase, a knack of facetious mimicry, and a man's career
might be made in a trice.  So it had been with Bryantsev, whom
Stepan Arkadyevitch had met the previous day, and who was one of
the highest functionaries in government now.  There was some
interest in official work like that.

The Petersburg attitude on pecuniary matters had an especially
soothing effect on Stepan Arkadyevitch.  Bartnyansky, who must
spend at least fifty thousand to judge by the style he lived in,
had made an interesting comment the day before on that subject.

As they were talking before dinner, Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
Bartnyansky:

"You're friendly, I fancy, with Mordvinsky; you might do me a
favor: say a word to him, please, for me.  There's an appointment
I should like to get--secretary of the agency..."

"Oh, I shan't remember all that, if you tell it to me....  But
what possesses you to have to do with railways and Jews?...  Take
it as you will, it's a low business."

Stepan Arkadyevitch did not say to Bartnyansky that it was a
"growing thing"--Bartnyansky would not have understood that.

"I want the money, I've nothing to live on."

"You're living, aren't you?"

"Yes, but in debt."

"Are you, though?  Heavily?" said Bartnyansky sympathetically.

"Very heavily: twenty thousand."

Bartnyansky broke into good-humored laughter.

"Oh, lucky fellow!" said he.  "My debts mount up to a million and
a half, and I've nothing, and still I can live, as you see!"

And Stepan Arkadyevitch saw the correctness of this view not in
words only but in actual fact.  Zhivahov owed three hundred
thousand, and hadn't a farthing to bless himself with, and he
lived, and in style too!  Count Krivtsov was considered a
hopeless case by everyone, and yet he kept two mistresses.
Petrovsky had run through five millions, and still lived in just
the same style, and was even a manager in the financial
department with a salary of twenty thousand.  But besides this,
Petersburg had physically an agreeable effect on Stepan
Arkadyevitch.  It made him younger.  In Moscow he sometimes found
a gray hair in his head, dropped asleep after dinner, stretched,
walked slowly upstairs, breathing heavily, was bored by the
society of young women, and did not dance at balls.  In
Petersburg he always felt ten years younger.

His experience in Petersburg was exactly what had been described
to him on the previous day by Prince Pyotr Oblonsky, a man of
sixty, who had just come back from abroad:

"We don't know the way to live here," said Pyotr Oblonsky.  "I
spent the summer in Baden, and you wouldn't believe it, I felt
quite a young man.  At a glimpse of a pretty woman, my
thoughts....  One dines and drinks a glass of wine, and feels
strong and ready for anything.  I came home to Russia--had to see
my wife, and, what's more, go to my country place; and there,
you'd hardly believe it, in a fortnight I'd got into a dressing
gown and given up dressing for dinner.  Needn't say I had no
thoughts left for pretty women.  I became quite an old gentleman.
There was nothing left for me but to think of my eternal
salvation.  I went off to Paris--I was as right as could be at
once."

Stepan Arkadyevitch felt exactly the difference that Pyotr
Oblonsky described.  In Moscow he degenerated so much that if he
had had to be there for long together, he might in good earnest
have come to considering his salvation; in Petersburg he felt
himself a man of the world again.

Between Princess Betsy Tverskaya and Stepan Arkadyevitch there
had long existed rather curious relations.  Stepan Arkadyevitch
always flirted with her in jest, and used to say to her, also in
jest, the most unseemly things, knowing that nothing delighted
her so much.  The day after his conversation with Karenin, Stepan
Arkadyevitch went to see her, and felt so youthful that in this
jesting flirtation and nonsense he recklessly went so far that he
did not know how to extricate himself, as unluckily he was so far
from being attracted by her that he thought her positively
disagreeable.  What made it hard to change the conversation was
the fact that he was very attractive to her.  So that he was
considerably relieved at the arrival of Princess Myakaya, which
cut short their _tête-à-tête_.

"Ah, so you're here!" said she when she saw him.  "Well, and what
news of your poor sister?  You needn't look at me like that," she
added.  "Ever since they've all turned against her, all those
who're a thousand times worse than she, I've thought she did a
very fine thing.  I can't forgive Vronsky for not letting me know
when she was in Petersburg.  I'd have gone to see her and gone
about with her everywhere.  Please give her my love.  Come, tell
me about her."

"Yes, her position is very difficult; she..." began Stepan
Arkadyevitch, in the simplicity of his heart accepting as
sterling coin Princess Myakaya's words "tell me about her."
Princess Myakaya interrupted him immediately, as she always did,
and began talking herself.

"She's done what they all do, except me--only they hide it.  But
she wouldn't be deceitful, and she did a fine thing.  And she did
better still in throwing up that crazy brother-in-law of yours.
You must excuse me.  Everybody used to say he was so clever, so
very clever; I was the only one that said he was a fool.  Now
that he's so thick with Lidia Ivanovna and Landau, they all say
he's crazy, and I should prefer not to agree with everybody, but
this time I can't help it."

"Oh, do please explain," said Stepan Arkadyevitch; "what does it
mean?  Yesterday I was seeing him on my sister's behalf, and I
asked him to give me a final answer.  He gave me no answer, and
said he would think it over.  But this morning, instead of an
answer, I received an invitation from Countess Lidia Ivanovna
for this evening."

"Ah, so that's it, that's it!" said Princess Myakaya gleefully,
"they're going to ask Landau what he's to say."

"Ask Landau?  What for?  Who or what's Landau?"

"What! you don't know Jules Landau, _le fameux Jules Landau,
le clairvoyant_?  He's crazy too, but on him your sister's fate
depends.  See what comes of living in the provinces--you know
nothing about anything.  Landau, do you see, was a _commis_ in
a shop in Paris, and he went to a doctor's; and in the doctor's
waiting room he fell asleep, and in his sleep he began giving
advice to all the patients.  And wonderful advice it was!  Then
the wife of Yury Meledinsky--you know, the invalid?--heard of
this Landau, and had him to see her husband.  And he cured her
husband, though I can't say that I see he did him much good, for
he's just as feeble a creature as ever he was, but they believed
in him, and took him along with them and brought him to Russia.
Here there's been a general rush to him, and he's begun doctoring
everyone.  He cured Countess Bezzubova, and she took such a fancy
to him that she adopted him."

"Adopted him?"

"Yes, as her son.  He's not Landau any more now, but Count
Bezzubov.  That's neither here nor there, though; but Lidia--I'm
very fond of her, but she has a screw loose somewhere--has lost
her heart to this Landau now, and nothing is settled now in her
house or Alexey Alexandrovitch's without him, and so your
sister's fate is now in the hands of Landau, _alias_ Count
Bezzubov."



Chapter 21


After a capital dinner and a great deal of cognac drunk at
Bartnyansky's, Stepan Arkadyevitch, only a little later than the
appointed time, went in to Countess Lidia Ivanovna's.

"Who else is with the countess?--a Frenchman?" Stepan
Arkadyevitch asked the hall porter, as he glanced at the familiar
overcoat of Alexey Alexandrovitch and a queer, rather
artless-looking overcoat with clasps.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin and Count Bezzubov," the porter
answered severely.

"Princess Myakaya guessed right," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch, as
he went upstairs.  "Curious!  It would be quite as well, though,
to get on friendly terms with her.  She has immense influence.
If she would say a word to Pomorsky, the thing would be a
certainty."

It was still quite light out-of-doors, but in Countess Lidia
Ivanovna's little drawing room the blinds were drawn and the
lamps lighted.  At a round table under a lamp sat the countess
and Alexey Alexandrovitch, talking softly.  A short, thinnish
man, very pale and handsome, with feminine hips and knock-kneed
legs, with fine brilliant eyes and long hair lying on the collar
of his coat, was standing at the end of the room gazing at the
portraits on the wall.  After greeting the lady of the house and
Alexey Alexandrovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch could not resist
glancing once more at the unknown man.

"Monsieur Landau!" the countess addressed him with a softness and
caution that impressed Oblonsky.  And she introduced them.

Landau looked round hurriedly, came up, and smiling, laid his
moist, lifeless hand in Stepan Arkadyevitch's outstretched hand
and immediately walked away and fell to gazing at the portraits
again.  The countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch looked at each
other significantly.

"I am very glad to see you, particularly today," said Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, pointing Stepan Arkadyevitch to a seat beside
Karenin.

"I introduced you to him as Landau," she said in a soft voice,
glancing at the Frenchman and again immediately after at Alexey
Alexandrovitch, "but he is really Count Bezzubov, as you're
probably aware.  Only he does not like the title."

"Yes, I heard so," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch; "they say he
completely cured Countess Bezzubova."

"She was here today, poor thing!" the countess said, turning to
Alexey Alexandrovitch.  "This separation is awful for her.  It's
such a blow to her!"

"And he positively is going?" queried Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Yes, he's going to Paris.  He heard a voice yesterday," said
Countess Lidia Ivanovna, looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Ah, a voice!" repeated Oblonsky, feeling that he must be as
circumspect as he possibly could in this society, where something
peculiar was going on, or was to go on, to which he had not the
key.

A moment's silence followed, after which Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
as though approaching the main topic of conversation, said with a
fine smile to Oblonsky:

"I've known you for a long while, and am very glad to make a
closer acquaintance with you.  _Les amis de nos amis sont nos
amis._  But to be a true friend, one must enter into the spiritual
state of one's friend, and I fear that you are not doing so in
the case of Alexey Alexandrovitch.  You understand what I mean?"
she said, lifting her fine pensive eyes.

"In part, countess, I understand the position of Alexey
Alexandrovitch..." said Oblonsky.  Having no clear idea what they
were talking about, he wanted to confine himself to generalities.

"The change is not in his external position," Countess Lidia
Ivanovna said sternly, following with eyes of love the figure of
Alexey Alexandrovitch as he got up and crossed over to Landau;
"his heart is changed, a new heart has been vouchsafed him, and
I fear you don't fully apprehend the change that has taken place
in him."

"Oh, well, in general outlines I can conceive the change.  We
have always been friendly, and now..." said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
responding with a sympathetic glance to the expression of the
countess, and mentally balancing the question with which of the
two ministers she was most intimate, so as to know about which to
ask her to speak for him.

"The change that has taken place in him cannot lessen his love
for his neighbors; on the contrary, that change can only
intensify love in his heart.  But I am afraid you do not
understand me.  Won't you have some tea?" she said, with her eyes
indicating the footman, who was handing round tea on a tray.

"Not quite, countess.  Of course, his misfortune..."

"Yes, a misfortune which has proved the highest happiness, when
his heart was made new, was filled full of it," she said, gazing
with eyes full of love at Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"I do believe I might ask her to speak to both of them," thought
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Oh, of course, countess," he said; "but I imagine such changes
are a matter so private that no one, even the most intimate
friend, would care to speak of them."

"On the contrary!  We ought to speak freely and help one
another."

"Yes, undoubtedly so, but there is such a difference of
convictions, and besides..." said Oblonsky with a soft smile.

"There can be no difference where it is a question of holy
truth."

"Oh, no, of course; but..." and Stepan Arkadyevitch paused in
confusion.  He understood at last that they were talking of
religion.

"I fancy he will fall asleep immediately," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch in a whisper full of meaning, going up to Lidia
Ivanovna.

Stepan Arkadyevitch looked round.  Landau was sitting at the
window, leaning on his elbow and the back of his chair, his head
drooping.  Noticing that all eyes were turned on him he raised
his head and smiled a smile of childlike artlessness.

"Don't take any notice," said Lidia Ivanovna, and she lightly
moved a chair up for Alexey Alexandrovitch.  "I have observed..."
she was beginning, when a footman came into the room with a
letter.  Lidia Ivanovna rapidly ran her eyes over the note, and
excusing herself, wrote an answer with extraordinary rapidity,
handed it to the man, and came back to the table.  "I have
observed," she went on, "that Moscow people, especially the men,
are more indifferent to religion than anyone."

"Oh, no, countess, I thought Moscow people had the reputation of
being the firmest in the faith," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"But as far as I can make out, you are unfortunately one of the
indifferent ones," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, turning to him
with a weary smile.

"How anyone can be indifferent!" said Lidia Ivanovna.

"I am not so much indifferent on that subject as I am waiting in
suspense," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his most deprecating
smile.  "I hardly think that the time for such questions has come
yet for me."

Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna looked at each other.

"We can never tell whether the time has come for us or not," said
Alexey Alexandrovitch severely.  "We ought not to think whether
we are ready or not ready.  God's grace is not guided by human
considerations: sometimes it comes not to those that strive for
it, and comes to those that are unprepared, like Saul."

"No, I believe it won't be just yet," said Lidia Ivanovna, who
had been meanwhile watching the movements of the Frenchman.
Landau got up and came to them.

"Do you allow me to listen?" he asked.

"Oh, yes; I did not want to disturb you," said Lidia Ivanovna,
gazing tenderly at him; "sit here with us."

"One has only not to close one's eyes to shut out the light,"
Alexey Alexandrovitch went on.

"Ah, if you knew the happiness we know, feeling His presence ever
in our hearts!" said Countess Lidia Ivanovna with a rapturous
smile.

"But a man may feel himself unworthy sometimes to rise to that
height," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, conscious of hypocrisy in
admitting this religious height, but at the same time unable to
bring himself to acknowledge his free-thinking views before a
person who, by a single word to Pomorsky, might procure him the
coveted appointment.

"That is, you mean that sin keeps him back?" said Lidia Ivanovna.
"But that is a false idea.  There is no sin for believers, their
sin has been atoned for.  _Pardon,_" she added, looking at the
footman, who came in again with another letter.  She read it and
gave a verbal answer: "Tomorrow at the Grand Duchess's, say."
"For the believer sin is not," she went on.

"Yes, but faith without works is dead," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
recalling the phrase from the catechism, and only by his smile
clinging to his independence.

"There you have it--from the epistle of St. James," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, addressing Lidia Ivanovna, with a certain
reproachfulness in his tone.  It was unmistakably a subject they
had discussed more than once before.  "What harm has been done by
the false interpretation of that passage!  Nothing holds men back
from belief like that misinterpretation.  'I have not works, so I
cannot believe,' though all the while that is not said.  But the
very opposite is said."

"Striving for God, saving the soul by fasting," said Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, with disgusted contempt, "those are the crude
ideas of our monks....  Yet that is nowhere said.  It is far
simpler and easier," she added, looking at Oblonsky with the same
encouraging smile with which at court she encouraged youthful
maids of honor, disconcerted by the new surroundings of the
court.

"We are saved by Christ who suffered for us.  We are saved by
faith," Alexey Alexandrovitch chimed in, with a glance of
approval at her words.

_"Vous comprenez l'anglais?"_ asked Lidia Ivanovna, and receiving
a reply in the affirmative, she got up and began looking through
a shelf of books.

"I want to read him 'Safe and Happy,' or 'Under the Wing,'" she
said, looking inquiringly at Karenin.  And finding the book, and
sitting down again in her place, she opened it.  "It's very
short.  In it is described the way by which faith can be reached,
and the happiness, above all earthly bliss, with which it fills
the soul.  The believer cannot be unhappy because he is not
alone.  But you will see."  She was just settling herself to read
when the footman came in again.  "Madame Borozdina?  Tell her,
tomorrow at two o'clock.  Yes," she said, putting her finger in
the place in the book, and gazing before her with her fine
pensive eyes, "that is how true faith acts.  You know Marie
Sanina?  You know about her trouble?  She lost her only child.
She was in despair.  And what happened?  She found this
comforter, and she thanks God now for the death of her child.
Such is the happiness faith brings!"

"Oh, yes, that is most..." said Stepan Arkadyevitch, glad they
were going to read, and let him have a chance to collect his
faculties.  "No, I see I'd better not ask her about anything
today," he thought.  "If only I can get out of this without
putting my foot in it!"

"It will be dull for you," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
addressing Landau; "you don't know English, but it's short."

"Oh, I shall understand," said Landau, with the same smile, and
he closed his eyes.  Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna
exchanged meaningful glances, and the reading began.



Chapter 22


Stepan Arkadyevitch felt completely nonplussed by the strange
talk which he was hearing for the first time.  The complexity of
Petersburg, as a rule, had a stimulating effect on him, rousing
him out of his Moscow stagnation.  But he liked these
complications, and understood them only in the circles he knew
and was at home in.  In these unfamiliar surroundings he was
puzzled and disconcerted, and could not get his bearings.  As he
listened to Countess Lidia Ivanovna, aware of the beautiful,
artless--or perhaps artful, he could not decide which--eyes of
Landau fixed upon him, Stepan Arkadyevitch began to be conscious
of a peculiar heaviness in his head.

The most incongruous ideas were in confusion in his head.  "Marie
Sanina is glad her child's dead....  How good a smoke would be
now!...  To be saved, one need only believe, and the monks
don't know how the thing's to be done, but Countess Lidia
Ivanovna does know....  And why is my head so heavy?  Is it the
cognac, or all this being so queer?  Anyway, I fancy I've done
nothing unsuitable so far.  But anyway, it won't do to ask her
now.  They say they make one say one's prayers.  I only hope
they won't make me!  That'll be too imbecile.  And what stuff it
is she's reading! but she has a good accent.  Landau--Bezzubov--
what's he Bezzubov for?"  All at once Stepan Arkadyevitch became
aware that his lower jaw was uncontrollably forming a yawn.  He
pulled his whiskers to cover the yawn, and shook himself
together.  But soon after he became aware that he was dropping
asleep and on the very point of snoring.  He recovered himself at
the very moment when the voice of Countess Lidia Ivanovna was
saying "he's asleep."  Stepan Arkadyevitch started with dismay,
feeling guilty and caught.  But he was reassured at once by
seeing that the words "he's asleep" referred not to him, but to
Landau.  The Frenchman was asleep as well as Stepan Arkadyevitch.
But Stepan Arkadyevitch's being asleep would have offended them,
as he thought (though even this, he thought, might not be so, as
everything seemed so queer), while Landau's being asleep
delighted them extremely, especially Countess Lidia Ivanovna.

_"Mon ami,"_ said Lidia Ivanovna, carefully holding the folds of
her silk gown so as not to rustle, and in her excitement calling
Karenin not Alexey Alexandrovitch, but _"mon ami," "donnez-lui la
main.  Vous voyez?  Sh!"_ she hissed at the footman as he came in
again.  "Not at home."

The Frenchman was asleep, or pretending to be asleep, with his
head on the back of his chair, and his moist hand, as it lay on
his knee, made faint movements, as though trying to catch
something.  Alexey Alexandrovitch got up, tried to move
carefully, but stumbled against the table, went up and laid his
hand in the Frenchman's hand.  Stepan Arkadyevitch got up too,
and opening his eyes wide, trying to wake himself up if he were
asleep, he looked first at one and then at the other.  It was all
real.  Stepan Arkadyevitch felt that his head was getting worse
and worse.

_"Que la personne qui est arrivee la derniere, celle qui demande,
qu'elle sorte!  Qu'elle sorte!"_ articulated the Frenchman,
without opening his eyes.

_"Vous m'excuserez, mais vous voyez....  Revenez vers dix heures,
encore mieux demain."_

_"Qu'elle sorte!"_ repeated the Frenchman impatiently.

_"C'est moi, n'est-ce pas?"_ And receiving an answer in the
affirmative, Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting the favor he had
meant to ask of Lidia Ivanovna, and forgetting his sister's
affairs, caring for nothing, but filled with the sole desire to
get away as soon as possible, went out on tiptoe and ran out into
the street as though from a plague-stricken house.  For a long
while he chatted and joked with his cab-driver, trying to recover
his spirits.

At the French theater where he arrived for the last act, and
afterwards at the Tatar restaurant after his champagne, Stepan
Arkadyevitch felt a little refreshed in the atmosphere he was
used to.  But still he felt quite unlike himself all that
evening.

On getting home to Pyotr Oblonsky's, where he was staying, Stepan
Arkadyevitch found a note from Betsy.  She wrote to him that she
was very anxious to finish their interrupted conversation, and
begged him to come next day.  He had scarcely read this note, and
frowned at its contents, when he heard below the ponderous tramp
of the servants, carrying something heavy.

Stepan Arkadyevitch went out to look.  It was the rejuvenated
Pyotr Oblonsky.  He was so drunk that he could not walk upstairs;
but he told them to set him on his legs when he saw Stepan
Arkadyevitch, and clinging to him, walked with him into his room
and there began telling him how he had spent the evening, and
fell asleep doing so.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was in very low spirits, which happened
rarely with him, and for a long while he could not go to sleep.
Everything he could recall to his mind, everything was
disgusting; but most disgusting of all, as if it were something
shameful, was the memory of the evening he had spent at Countess
Lidia Ivanovna's.

Next day he received from Alexey Alexandrovitch a final answer,
refusing to grant Anna's divorce, and he understood that this
decision was based on what the Frenchman had said in his real or
pretended trance.



Chapter 23


In order to carry through any undertaking in family life, there
must necessarily be either complete division between the husband
and wife, or loving agreement.  When the relations of a couple
are vacillating and neither one thing nor the other, no sort of
enterprise can be undertaken.

Many families remain for years in the same place, though both
husband and wife are sick of it, simply because there is neither
complete division nor agreement between them.

Both Vronsky and Anna felt life in Moscow insupportable in the
heat and dust, when the spring sunshine was followed by the glare
of summer, and all the trees in the boulevards had long since
been in full leaf, and the leaves were covered with dust.  But
they did not go back to Vozdvizhenskoe, as they had arranged to
do long before; they went on staying in Moscow, though they both
loathed it, because of late there had been no agreement between
them.

The irritability that kept them apart had no external cause, and
all efforts to come to an understanding intensified it, instead
of removing it.  It was an inner irritation, grounded in her mind
on the conviction that his love had grown less; in his, on regret
that he had put himself for her sake in a difficult position,
which she, instead of lightening, made still more difficult.
Neither of them gave full utterance to their sense of grievance,
but they considered each other in the wrong, and tried on every
pretext to prove this to one another.

In her eyes the whole of him, with all his habits, ideas,
desires, with all his spiritual and physical temperament, was one
thing--love for women, and that love, she felt, ought to be
entirely concentrated on her alone.  That love was less;
consequently, as she reasoned, he must have transferred part of
his love to other women or to another woman--and she was jealous.
She was jealous not of any particular woman but of the decrease
of his love.  Not having got an object for her jealousy, she was
on the lookout for it.  At the slightest hint she transferred her
jealousy from one object to another.  At one time she was jealous
of those low women with whom he might so easily renew his old
bachelor ties; then she was jealous of the society women he might
meet; then she was jealous of the imaginary girl whom he might
want to marry, for whose sake he would break with her.  And this
last form of jealousy tortured her most of all, especially as he
had unwarily told her, in a moment of frankness, that his mother
knew him so little that she had had the audacity to try and
persuade him to marry the young Princess Sorokina.

And being jealous of him, Anna was indignant against him and
found grounds for indignation in everything.  For everything that
was difficult in her position she blamed him.  The agonizing
condition of suspense she had passed in Moscow, the tardiness and
indecision of Alexey Alexandrovitch, her solitude--she put it all
down to him.  If he had loved her he would have seen all the
bitterness of her position, and would have rescued her from it.
For her being in Moscow and not in the country, he was to blame
too.  He could not live buried in the country as she would have
liked to do.  He must have society, and he had put her in this
awful position, the bitterness of which he would not see.  And
again, it was his fault that she was forever separated from her
son.

Even the rare moments of tenderness that came from time to time
did not soothe her; in his tenderness now she saw a shade of
complacency, of self-confidence, which had not been of old,
and which exasperated her.

It was dusk.  Anna was alone, and waiting for him to come back
from a bachelor dinner.  She walked up and down in his study (the
room where the noise from the street was least heard), and
thought over every detail of their yesterday's quarrel.  Going
back from the well-remembered, offensive words of the quarrel to
what had been the ground of it, she arrived at last at its
origin.  For a long while she could hardly believe that their
dissension had arisen from a conversation so inoffensive, of so
little moment to either.  But so it actually had been.  It all
arose from his laughing at the girls' high schools, declaring
they were useless, while she defended them.  He had spoken
slightingly of women's education in general, and had said that
Hannah, Anna's English protegée, had not the slightest need to
know anything of physics.

This irritated Anna.  She saw in this a contemptuous reference to
her occupations.  And she bethought her of a phrase to pay him
back for the pain he had given her.  "I don't expect you to
understand me, my feelings, as anyone who loved me might, but
simple delicacy I did expect," she said.

And he had actually flushed with vexation, and had said something
unpleasant.  She could not recall her answer, but at that point,
with an unmistakable desire to wound her too, he had said:

"I feel no interest in your infatuation over this girl, that's
true, because I see it's unnatural."

The cruelty with which he shattered the world she had built up
for herself so laboriously to enable her to endure her hard life,
the injustice with which he had accused her of affectation, of
artificiality, aroused her.

"I am very sorry that nothing but what's coarse and material is
comprehensible and natural to you," she said and walked out of
the room.

When he had come in to her yesterday evening, they had not
referred to the quarrel, but both felt that the quarrel had been
smoothed over, but was not at an end.

Today he had not been at home all day, and she felt so lonely
and wretched in being on bad terms with him that she wanted to
forget it all, to forgive him, and be reconciled with him; she
wanted to throw the blame on herself and to justify him.

"I am myself to blame.  I'm irritable, I'm insanely jealous.  I
will make it up with him, and we'll go away to the country; there
I shall be more at peace."

"Unnatural!" She suddenly recalled the word that had stung her
most of all, not so much the word itself as the intent to wound
her with which it was said.  "I know what he meant; he meant--
unnatural, not loving my own daughter, to love another person's
child.  What does he know of love for children, of my love for
Seryozha, whom I've sacrificed for him?  But that wish to wound
me!  No, he loves another woman, it must be so."

And perceiving that, while trying to regain her peace of mind,
she had gone round the same circle that she had been round so
often before, and had come back to her former state of
exasperation, she was horrified at herself.  "Can it be
impossible?  Can it be beyond me to control myself?" she said to
herself, and began again from the beginning.  "He's truthful,
he's honest, he loves me.  I love him, and in a few days the
divorce will come.  What more do I want?  I want peace of mind
and trust, and I will take the blame on myself.  Yes, now when he
comes in, I will tell him I was wrong, though I was not wrong,
and we will go away tomorrow."

And to escape thinking any more, and being overcome by
irritability, she rang, and ordered the boxes to be brought up
for packing their things for the country.

At ten o'clock Vronsky came in.



Chapter 24


"Well, was it nice?" she asked, coming out to meet him with a
penitent and meek expression.

"Just as usual," he answered, seeing at a glance that she was in
one of her good moods.  He was used by now to these transitions,
and he was particularly glad to see it today, as he was in a
specially good humor himself.

"What do I see?  Come, that's good!" he said, pointing to the
boxes in the passage.

"Yes, we must go.  I went out for a drive, and it was so fine I
longed to be in the country.  There's nothing to keep you, is
there?"

"It's the one thing I desire.  I'll be back directly, and we'll
talk it over; I only want to change my coat.  Order some tea."

And he went into his room.

There was something mortifying in the way he had said "Come,
that's good," as one says to a child when it leaves off being
naughty, and still more mortifying was the contrast between her
penitent and his self-confident tone; and for one instant she
felt the lust of strife rising up in her again, but making an
effort she conquered it, and met Vronsky as good-humoredly as
before.

When he came in she told him, partly repeating phrases she had
prepared beforehand, how she had spent the day, and her plans for
going away.

"You know it came to me almost like an inspiration," she said.
"Why wait here for the divorce?  Won't it be just the same in the
country?  I can't wait any longer!  I don't want to go on hoping,
I don't want to hear anything about the divorce.  I have made up
my mind it shall not have any more influence on my life.  Do you
agree?"

"Oh, yes!" he said, glancing uneasily at her excited face.

"What did you do?  Who was there?" she said, after a pause.

Vronsky mentioned the names of the guests.  "The dinner was
first rate, and the boat race, and it was all pleasant enough,
but in Moscow they can never do anything without something
_ridicule_.  A lady of a sort appeared on the scene, teacher of
swimming to the Queen of Sweden, and gave us an exhibition of her
skill."

"How? did she swim?" asked Anna, frowning.

"In an absurd red _costume de natation;_ she was old and hideous
too.  So when shall we go?"

"What an absurd fancy!  Why, did she swim in some special way,
then?" said Anna, not answering.

"There was absolutely nothing in it.  That's just what I say, it
was awfully stupid.  Well, then, when do you think of going?"

Anna shook her head as though trying to drive away some
unpleasant idea.

"When?  Why, the sooner the better!  By tomorrow we shan't be
ready.  The day after tomorrow."

"Yes...oh, no, wait a minute!  The day after to-morrow's Sunday,
I have to be at maman's," said Vronsky, embarrassed, because as
soon as he uttered his mother's name he was aware of her intent,
suspicious eyes.  His embarrassment confirmed her suspicion.  She
flushed hotly and drew away from him.  It was now not the Queen
of Sweden's swimming-mistress who filled Anna's imagination, but
the young Princess Sorokina.  She was staying in a village near
Moscow with Countess Vronskaya.

"Can't you go tomorrow?" she said.

"Well, no!  The deeds and the money for the business I'm going
there for I can't get by tomorrow," he answered.

"If so, we won't go at all."

"But why so?"

"I shall not go later.  Monday or never!"

"What for?" said Vronsky, as though in amazement.  "Why, there's
no meaning in it!"

"There's no meaning in it to you, because you care nothing for
me.  You don't care to understand my life.  The one thing that I
cared for here was Hannah.  You say it's affectation.  Why, you
said yesterday that I don't love my daughter, that I love this
English girl, that it's unnatural.  I should like to know what
life there is for me that could be natural!"

For an instant she had a clear vision of what she was doing, and
was horrified at how she had fallen away from her resolution.
But even though she knew it was her own ruin, she could not
restrain herself, could not keep herself from proving to him that
he was wrong, could not give way to him.

"I never said that; I said I did not sympathize with this sudden
passion."

"How is it, though you boast of your straightforwardness, you
don't tell the truth?"

"I never boast, and I never tell lies," he said slowly,
restraining his rising anger.  "It's a great pity if you can't
respect..."

"Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should
be.  And if you don't love me any more, it would be better and
more honest to say so."

"No, this is becoming unbearable!" cried Vronsky, getting up from
his chair; and stopping short, facing her, he said, speaking
deliberately: "What do you try my patience for?" looking as
though he might have said much more, but was restraining himself.
"It has limits."

"What do you mean by that?" she cried, looking with terror at the
undisguised hatred in his whole face, and especially in his
cruel, menacing eyes.

"I mean to say..." he was beginning, but he checked himself.  "I
must ask what it is you want of me?"

"What can I want?  All I can want is that you should not desert
me, as you think of doing," she said, understanding all he had
not uttered.  "But that I don't want; that's secondary.  I want
love, and there is none.  So then all is over."

She turned towards the door.

"Stop! sto-op!" said Vronsky, with no change in the gloomy lines
of his brows, though he held her by the hand.  "What is it all
about?  I said that we must put off going for three days, and on
that you told me I was lying, that I was not an honorable man."

"Yes, and I repeat that the man who reproaches me with having
sacrificed everything for me," she said, recalling the words of a
still earlier quarrel, "that he's worse than a dishonorable man--
he's a heartless man."

"Oh, there are limits to endurance!" he cried, and hastily let go
her hand.

"He hates me, that's clear," she thought, and in silence, without
looking round, she walked with faltering steps out of the room.
"He loves another woman, that's even clearer," she said to
herself as she went into her own room.  "I want love, and there
is none.  So, then, all is over."  She repeated the words she had
said, "and it must be ended."

"But how?" she asked herself, and she sat down in a low chair
before the looking glass.

Thoughts of where she would go now, whether to the aunt who had
brought her up, to Dolly, or simply alone abroad, and of what
_he_ was doing now alone in his study; whether this was the final
quarrel, or whether reconciliation were still possible; and of
what all her old friends at Petersburg would say of her now; and
of how Alexey Alexandrovitch would look at it, and many other
ideas of what would happen now after this rupture, came into her
head; but she did not give herself up to them with all her heart.
At the bottom of her heart was some obscure idea that alone
interested her, but she could not get clear sight of it.
Thinking once more of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she recalled the
time of her illness after her confinement, and the feeling which
never left her at that time.  "Why didn't I die?" and the words
and the feeling of that time came back to her.  And all at once
she knew what was in her soul.  Yes, it was that idea which alone
solved all.  "Yes, to die!...  And the shame and disgrace of
Alexey Alexandrovitch and of Seryozha, and my awful shame, it
will all be saved by death.  To die! and he will feel remorse;
will be sorry; will love me; he will suffer on my account."  With
the trace of a smile of commiseration for herself she sat down in
the armchair, taking off and putting on the rings on her left
hand, vividly picturing from different sides his feelings after
her death.

Approaching footsteps--his steps--distracted her attention.  As
though absorbed in the arrangement of her rings, she did not even
turn to him.

He went up to her, and taking her by the hand, said softly:

"Anna, we'll go the day after tomorrow, if you like.  I agree
to everything."

She did not speak.

"What is it?" he urged.

"You know," she said, and at the same instant, unable to restrain
herself any longer, she burst into sobs.

"Cast me off!" she articulated between her sobs.  "I'll go away
tomorrow...I'll do more.  What am I?  An immoral woman!  A stone
round your neck.  I don't want to make you wretched, I don't want
to!  I'll set you free.  You don't love me; you love someone
else!"

Vronsky besought her to be calm, and declared that there was no
trace of foundation for her jealousy; that he had never ceased,
and never would cease, to love her; that he loved her more than
ever.

"Anna, why distress yourself and me so?" he said to her, kissing
her hands.  There was tenderness now in his face, and she fancied
she caught the sound of tears in his voice, and she felt them wet
on her hand.  And instantly Anna's despairing jealousy changed to
a despairing passion of tenderness.  She put her arms round him,
and covered with kisses his head, his neck, his hands.



Chapter 25


Feeling that the reconciliation was complete, Anna set eagerly
to work in the morning preparing for their departure.  Though it
was not settled whether they should go on Monday or Tuesday, as
they had each given way to the other, Anna packed busily, feeling
absolutely indifferent whether they went a day earlier or later.
She was standing in her room over an open box, taking things out
of it, when he came in to see her earlier than usual, dressed
to go out.

"I'm going off at once to see maman; she can send me the money by
Yegorov.  And I shall be ready to go tomorrow," he said.

Though she was in such a good mood, the thought of his visit to
his mother's gave her a pang.

"No, I shan't be ready by then myself," she said; and at once
reflected, "so then it was possible to arrange to do as I
wished."  "No, do as you meant to do.  Go into the dining room,
I'm coming directly.  It's only to turn out those things that
aren't wanted," she said, putting something more on the heap of
frippery that lay in Annushka's arms.

Vronsky was eating his beefsteak when she came into the dining-
room.

"You wouldn't believe how distasteful these rooms have become to
me," she said, sitting down beside him to her coffee.  "There's
nothing more awful than these _chambres garnies_.  There's no
individuality in them, no soul.  These clocks, and curtains, and,
worst of all, the wallpapers--they're a nightmare.  I think of
Vozdvizhenskoe as the promised land.  You're not sending the
horses off yet?"

"No, they will come after us.  Where are you going to?"

"I wanted to go to Wilson's to take some dresses to her.  So it's
really to be tomorrow?" she said in a cheerful voice; but
suddenly her face changed.

Vronsky's valet came in to ask him to sign a receipt for a
telegram from Petersburg.  There was nothing out of the way in
Vronsky's getting a telegram, but he said, as though anxious to
conceal something from her, that the receipt was in his study,
and he turned hurriedly to her.

"By tomorrow, without fail, I will finish it all."

"From whom is the telegram?" she asked, not hearing him.

"From Stiva," he answered reluctantly.

"Why didn't you show it to me?  What secret can there be between
Stiva and me?"

Vronsky called the valet back, and told him to bring the
telegram.

"I didn't want to show it to you, because Stiva has such a
passion for telegraphing: why telegraph when nothing is settled?"

"About the divorce?"

"Yes; but he says he has not been able to come at anything yet.
He has promised a decisive answer in a day or two.  But here it
is; read it."

With trembling hands Anna took the telegram, and read what
Vronsky had told her.  At the end was added: "Little hope; but
I will do everything possible and impossible."

"I said yesterday that it's absolutely nothing to me when I get,
or whether I never get, a divorce," she said, flushing crimson.
"There was not the slightest necessity to hide it from me."  "So
he may hide and does hide his correspondence with women from me,"
she thought.

"Yashvin meant to come this morning with Voytov," said Vronsky;
"I believe he's won from Pyevtsov all and more than he can pay,
about sixty thousand."

"No," she said, irritated by his so obviously showing by this
change of subject that he was irritated, "why did you suppose
that this news would affect me so, that you must even try to
hide it?  I said I don't want to consider it, and I should have
liked you to care as little about it as I do."

"I care about it because I like definiteness," he said.

"Definiteness is not in the form but the love," she said, more
and more irritated, not by his words, but by the tone of cool
composure in which he spoke.  "What do you want it for?"

"My God! love again," he thought, frowning.

"Oh, you know what for; for your sake and your children's in the
future."

"There won't be children in the future."

"That's a great pity," he said.

"You want it for the children's sake, but you don't think of me?"
she said, quite forgetting or not having heard that he had said,
"_for your sake_ and the children's."

The question of the possibility of having children had long been
a subject of dispute and irritation to her.  His desire to have
children she interpreted as a proof he did not prize her beauty.

"Oh, I said: for your sake.  Above all for your sake," he
repeated, frowning as though in pain, "because I am certain that
the greater part of your irritability comes from the
indefiniteness of the position."

"Yes, now he has laid aside all pretense, and all his cold hatred
for me is apparent," she thought, not hearing his words, but
watching with terror the cold, cruel judge who looked mocking her
out of his eyes.

"The cause is not that," she said, "and, indeed, I don't see how
the cause of my irritability, as you call it, can be that I am
completely in your power.  What indefiniteness is there in the
position? on the contrary..."

"I am very sorry that you don't care to understand," he
interrupted, obstinately anxious to give utterance to his
thought.  "The indefiniteness consists in your imagining that I
am free."

"On that score you can set your mind quite at rest," she said,
and turning away from him, she began drinking her coffee.

She lifted her cup, with her little finger held apart, and put it
to her lips.  After drinking a few sips she glanced at him, and
by his expression, she saw clearly that he was repelled by her
hand, and her gesture, and the sound made by her lips.

"I don't care in the least what your mother thinks, and what
match she wants to make for you," she said, putting the cup down
with a shaking hand.

"But we are not talking about that."

"Yes, that's just what we are talking about.  And let me tell you
that a heartless woman, whether she's old or not old, your mother
or anyone else, is of no consequence to me, and I would not
consent to know her."

"Anna, I beg you not to speak disrespectfully of my mother."

"A woman whose heart does not tell her where her son's happiness
and honor lie has no heart."

"I repeat my request that you will not speak disrespectfully of
my mother, whom I respect," he said, raising his voice and
looking sternly at her.

She did not answer.  Looking intently at him, at his face, his
hands, she recalled all the details of their reconciliation the
previous day, and his passionate caresses.  "There, just such
caresses he has lavished, and will lavish, and longs to lavish on
other women!" she thought.

"You don't love your mother.  That's all talk, and talk, and
talk!" she said, looking at him with hatred in her eyes.

"Even if so, you must..."

"Must decide, and I have decided," she said, and she would have
gone away, but at that moment Yashvin walked into the room.  Anna
greeted him and remained.

Why, when there was a tempest in her soul, and she felt she was
standing at a turning point in her life, which might have fearful
consequences--why, at that minute, she had to keep up appearances
before an outsider, who sooner or later must know it all--she did
not know.  But at once quelling the storm within her, she sat
down and began talking to their guest.

"Well, how are you getting on?  Has your debt been paid you?" she
asked Yashvin.

"Oh, pretty fair; I fancy I shan't get it all, but I shall get a
good half.  And when are you off?" said Yashvin, looking at
Vronsky, and unmistakably guessing at a quarrel.

"The day after tomorrow, I think," said Vronsky.

"You've been meaning to go so long, though."

"But now it's quite decided," said Anna, looking Vronsky straight
in the face with a look which told him not to dream of the
possibility of reconciliation.

"Don't you feel sorry for that unlucky Pyevtsov?" she went on,
talking to Yashvin.

"I've never asked myself the question, Anna Arkadyevna, whether
I'm sorry for him or not.  You see, all my fortune's here"--he
touched his breast pocket--"and just now I'm a wealthy man.  But
today I'm going to the club, and I may come out a beggar.  You
see, whoever sits down to play with me--he wants to leave me
without a shirt to my back, and so do I him.  And so we fight it
out, and that's the pleasure of it."

"Well, but suppose you were married," said Anna, "how would it be
for your wife?"

Yashvin laughed.

"That's why I'm not married, and never mean to be."

"And Helsingfors?" said Vronsky, entering into the conversation
and glancing at Anna's smiling face.  Meeting his eyes, Anna's
face instantly took a coldly severe expression as though she were
saying to him:  "It's not forgotten.  It's all the same."

"Were you really in love?" she said to Yashvin.

"Oh heavens! ever so many times!  But you see, some men can play
but only so that they can always lay down their cards when the
hour of a _rendezvous_ comes, while I can take up love, but only
so as not to be late for my cards in the evening.  That's how I
manage things."

"No, I didn't mean that, but the real thing."  She would have
said _Helsingfors_, but would not repeat the word used by Vronsky.

Voytov, who was buying the horse, came in.  Anna got up and went
out of the room.

Before leaving the house, Vronsky went into her room.  She would
have pretended to be looking for something on the table, but
ashamed of making a pretense, she looked straight in his face
with cold eyes.

"What do you want?" she asked in French.

"To get the guarantee for Gambetta, I've sold him," he said, in a
tone which said more clearly than words, "I've no time for
discussing things, and it would lead to nothing."

"I'm not to blame in any way," he thought.  "If she will punish
herself, _tant pis pour elle._"  But as he was going he fancied
that she said something, and his heart suddenly ached with pity
for her.

"Eh, Anna?" he queried.

"I said nothing," she answered just as coldly and calmly.

"Oh, nothing, tant pis then," he thought, feeling cold again, and
he turned and went out.  As he was going out he caught a glimpse
in the looking glass of her face, white, with quivering lips.  He
even wanted to stop and to say some comforting word to her, but
his legs carried him out of the room before he could think what
to say.  The whole of that day he spent away from home, and when
he came in late in the evening the maid told him that Anna
Arkadyevna had a headache and begged him not to go in to her.



Chapter 26


Never before had a day been passed in quarrel.  Today was the
first time.  And this was not a quarrel.  It was the open
acknowledgment of complete coldness.  Was it possible to glance
at her as he had glanced when he came into the room for the
guarantee?--to look at her, see her heart was breaking with
despair, and go out without a word with that face of callous
composure?  He was not merely cold to her, he hated her because
he loved another woman--that was clear.

And remembering all the cruel words he had said, Anna supplied,
too, the words that he had unmistakably wished to say and could
have said to her, and she grew more and more exasperated.

"I won't prevent you," he might say.  "You can go where you like.
You were unwilling to be divorced from your husband, no doubt so
that you might go back to him.  Go back to him.  If you want
money, I'll give it to you.  How many roubles do you want?"

All the most cruel words that a brutal man could say, he said to
her in her imagination, and she could not forgive him for them,
as though he had actually said them.

"But didn't he only yesterday swear he loved me, he, a truthful
and sincere man?  Haven't I despaired for nothing many times
already?" she said to herself afterwards.

All that day, except for the visit to Wilson's, which occupied
two hours, Anna spent in doubts whether everything were over or
whether there were still hope of reconciliation, whether she
should go away at once or see him once more.  She was expecting
him the whole day, and in the evening, as she went to her own
room, leaving a message for him that her head ached, she said to
herself, "If he comes in spite of what the maid says, it means
that he loves me still.  If not, it means that all is over, and
then I will decide what I'm to do!..."

In the evening she heard the rumbling of his carriage stop at the
entrance, his ring, his steps and his conversation with the
servant; he believed what was told him, did not care to find out
more, and went to his own room.  So then everything was over.

And death rose clearly and vividly before her mind as the sole
means of bringing back love for her in his heart, of punishing
him and of gaining the victory in that strife which the evil
spirit in possession of her heart was waging with him.

Now nothing mattered: going or not going to Vozdvizhenskoe,
getting or not getting a divorce from her husband--all that did
not matter.  The one thing that mattered was punishing him.  When
she poured herself out her usual dose of opium, and thought that
she had only to drink off the whole bottle to die, it seemed to
her so simple and easy, that she began musing with enjoyment on
how he would suffer, and repent and love her memory when it would
be too late.  She lay in bed with open eyes, by the light of a
single burned-down candle, gazing at the carved cornice of the
ceiling and at the shadow of the screen that covered part of it,
while she vividly pictured to herself how he would feel when she
would be no more, when she would be only a memory to him.  "How
could I say such cruel things to her?" he would say.  "How could
I go out of the room without saying anything to her?  But now she
is no more.  She has gone away from us forever.  She is...."
Suddenly the shadow of the screen wavered, pounced on the whole
cornice, the whole ceiling; other shadows from the other side
swooped to meet it, for an instant the shadows flitted back, but
then with fresh swiftness they darted forward, wavered,
commingled, and all was darkness.  "Death!" she thought.  And
such horror came upon her that for a long while she could not
realize where she was, and for a long while her trembling hands
could not find the matches and light another candle, instead of
the one that had burned down and gone out.  "No, anything--only
to live!  Why, I love him!  Why, he loves me!  This has been
before and will pass," she said, feeling that tears of joy at the
return to life were trickling down her cheeks.  And to escape
from her panic she went hurriedly to his room.

He was asleep there, and sleeping soundly.  She went up to him,
and holding the light above his face, she gazed a long while at
him.  Now when he was asleep, she loved him so that at the sight
of him she could not keep back tears of tenderness.  But she knew
that if he waked up he would look at her with cold eyes,
convinced that he was right, and that before telling him of her
love, she would have to prove to him that he had been wrong in
his treatment of her.  Without waking him, she went back, and
after a second dose of opium she fell towards morning into a
heavy, incomplete sleep, during which she never quite lost
consciousness.

In the morning she was waked by a horrible nightmare, which had
recurred several times in her dreams, even before her connection
with Vronsky.  A little old man with unkempt beard was doing
something bent down over some iron, muttering meaningless French
words, and she, as she always did in this nightmare (it was what
made the horror of it), felt that this peasant was taking no
notice of her, but was doing something horrible with the iron--
over her.  And she waked up in a cold sweat.

When she got up, the previous day came back to her as though
veiled in mist.

"There was a quarrel.  Just what has happened several times.  I
said I had a headache, and he did not come in to see me.
Tomorrow we're going away; I must see him and get ready for the
journey," she said to herself.  And learning that he was in his
study, she went down to him.  As she passed through the
drawing room she heard a carriage stop at the entrance, and
looking out of the window she saw the carriage, from which a
young girl in a lilac hat was leaning out giving some direction
to the footman ringing the bell.  After a parley in the hall,
someone came upstairs, and Vronsky's steps could be heard passing
the drawing room.  He went rapidly downstairs.  Anna went again
to the window.  She saw him come out onto the steps without his
hat and go up to the carriage.  The young girl in the lilac hat
handed him a parcel.  Vronsky, smiling, said something to her.
The carriage drove away, he ran rapidly upstairs again.

The mists that had shrouded everything in her soul parted
suddenly.  The feelings of yesterday pierced the sick heart with
a fresh pang.  She could not understand now how she could have
lowered herself by spending a whole day with him in his house.
She went into his room to announce her determination.

"That was Madame Sorokina and her daughter.  They came and
brought me the money and the deeds from maman.  I couldn't get
them yesterday.  How is your head, better?" he said quietly, not
wishing to see and to understand the gloomy and solemn expression
of her face.

She looked silently, intently at him, standing in the middle of
the room.  He glanced at her, frowned for a moment, and went on
reading a letter.  She turned, and went deliberately out of the
room.  He still might have turned her back, but she had reached
the door, he was still silent, and the only sound audible was the
rustling of the note paper as he turned it.

"Oh, by the way," he said at the very moment she was in the
doorway, "we're going tomorrow for certain, aren't we?"

"You, but not I," she said, turning round to him.

"Anna, we can't go on like this..."

"You, but not I," she repeated.

"This is getting unbearable!"

"You...you will be sorry for this," she said, and went out.

Frightened by the desperate expression with which these words
were uttered, he jumped up and would have run after her, but on
second thoughts he sat down and scowled, setting his teeth.  This
vulgar--as he thought it--threat of something vague exasperated
him.  "I've tried everything," he thought; "the only thing left
is not to pay attention," and he began to get ready to drive into
town, and again to his mother's to get her signature to the
deeds.

She heard the sound of his steps about the study and the dining
room.  At the drawing room he stood still.  But he did not turn
in to see her, he merely gave an order that the horse should be
given to Voytov if he came while he was away.  Then she heard the
carriage brought round, the door opened, and he came out again.
But he went back into the porch again, and someone was running
upstairs.  It was the valet running up for his gloves that had
been forgotten.  She went to the window and saw him take the
gloves without looking, and touching the coachman on the back he
said something to him.  Then without looking up at the window he
settled himself in his usual attitude in the carriage, with his
legs crossed, and drawing on his gloves he vanished round the
corner.



Chapter 27


"He has gone!  It is over!" Anna said to herself, standing at the
window; and in answer to this statement the impression of the
darkness when the candle had flickered out, and of her fearful
dream mingling into one, filled her heart with cold terror.

"No, that cannot be!" she cried, and crossing the room she rang
the bell.  She was so afraid now of being alone, that without
waiting for the servant to come in, she went out to meet him.

"Inquire where the count has gone," she said.  The servant
answered that the count had gone to the stable.

"His honor left word that if you cared to drive out, the carriage
would be back immediately."

"Very good.  Wait a minute.  I'll write a note at once.  Send
Mihail with the note to the stables.  Make haste."

She sat down and wrote:

"I was wrong.  Come back home; I must explain.  For God's sake
come! I'm afraid."

She sealed it up and gave it to the servant.

She was afraid of being left alone now; she followed the servant
out of the room, and went to the nursery.

"Why, this isn't it, this isn't he!  Where are his blue eyes, his
sweet, shy smile?" was her first thought when she saw her chubby,
rosy little girl with her black, curly hair instead of Seryozha,
whom in the tangle of her ideas she had expected to see in the
nursery.  The little girl sitting at the table was obstinately
and violently battering on it with a cork, and staring aimlessly
at her mother with her pitch-black eyes.  Answering the English
nurse that she was quite well, and that she was going to the
country tomorrow, Anna sat down by the little girl and began
spinning the cork to show her.  But the child's loud, ringing
laugh, and the motion of her eyebrows, recalled Vronsky so
vividly that she got up hurriedly, restraining her sobs, and went
away.  "Can it be all over?  No, it cannot be!" she thought.  "He
will come back.  But how can he explain that smile, that
excitement after he had been talking to her?  But even if he
doesn't explain, I will believe.  If I don't believe, there's
only one thing left for me, and I can't."

She looked at her watch.  Twenty minutes had passed.  "By now he
has received the note and is coming back.  Not long, ten minutes
more....  But what if he doesn't come?  No, that cannot be.  He
mustn't see me with tear-stained eyes.  I'll go and wash.  Yes,
yes; did I do my hair or not?" she asked herself.  And she could
not remember.  She felt her head with her hand.  "Yes, my hair
has been done, but when I did it I can't in the least remember."
She could not believe the evidence of her hand, and went up to
the pier glass to see whether she really had done her hair.  She
certainly had, but she could not think when she had done it.
"Who's that?" she thought, looking in the looking glass at the
swollen face with strangely glittering eyes, that looked in a
scared way at her.  "Why, it's I!" she suddenly understood, and
looking round, she seemed all at once to feel his kisses on her,
and twitched her shoulders, shuddering.  Then she lifted her hand
to her lips and kissed it.

"What is it?  Why, I'm going out of my mind!" and she went into
her bedroom, where Annushka was tidying the room.

"Annushka," she said, coming to a standstill before her, and she
stared at the maid, not knowing what to say to her.

"You meant to go and see Darya Alexandrovna," said the girl, as
though she understood.

"Darya Alexandrovna?  Yes, I'll go."

"Fifteen minutes there, fifteen minutes back.  He's coming, he'll
be here soon."  She took out her watch and looked at it.  "But
how could he go away, leaving me in such a state?  How can he
live, without making it up with me?"  She went to the window and
began looking into the street.  Judging by the time, he might be
back now.  But her calculations might be wrong, and she began
once more to recall when he had started and to count the minutes.

At the moment when she had moved away to the big clock to compare
it with her watch, someone drove up.  Glancing out of the window,
she saw his carriage.  But no one came upstairs, and voices could
be heard below.  It was the messenger who had come back in the
carriage.  She went down to him.

"We didn't catch the count.  The count had driven off on the
lower city road."

"What do you say?  What!..." she said to the rosy, good-humored
Mihail, as he handed her back her note.

"Why, then, he has never received it!" she thought.

"Go with this note to Countess Vronskaya's place, you know? and
bring an answer back immediately," she said to the messenger.

"And I, what am I going to do?" she thought.  "Yes, I'm going to
Dolly's, that's true or else I shall go out of my mind.  Yes, and
I can telegraph, too."  And she wrote a telegram.  "I absolutely
must talk to you; come at once."  After sending off the telegram,
she went to dress.  When she was dressed and in her hat, she
glanced again into the eyes of the plump, comfortable-looking
Annushka.  There was unmistakable sympathy in those good-natured
little gray eyes.

"Annushka, dear, what am I to do?" said Anna, sobbing and sinking
helplessly into a chair.

"Why fret yourself so, Anna Arkadyevna?  Why, there's nothing out
of the way.  You drive out a little, and it'll cheer you up,"
said the maid.

"Yes, I'm going," said Anna, rousing herself and getting up.
"And if there's a telegram while I'm away, send it on to Darya
Alexandrovna's...but no, I shall be back myself."

"Yes, I mustn't think, I must do something, drive somewhere, and
most of all, get out of this house," she said, feeling with
terror the strange turmoil going on in her own heart, and she
made haste to go out and get into the carriage.

"Where to?" asked Pyotr before getting onto the box.

"To Znamenka, the Oblonskys'."



Chapter 28


It was bright and sunny.  A fine rain had been falling all the
morning, and now it had not long cleared up.  The iron roofs, the
flags of the roads, the flints of the pavements, the wheels and
leather, the brass and the tinplate of the carriages--all
glistened brightly in the May sunshine.  It was three o'clock,
and the very liveliest time in the streets.

As she sat in a corner of the comfortable carriage, that hardly
swayed on its supple springs, while the grays trotted swiftly, in
the midst of the unceasing rattle of wheels and the changing
impressions in the pure air, Anna ran over the events of the last
days, and she saw her position quite differently from how it had
seemed at home.  Now the thought of death seemed no longer so
terrible and so clear to her, and death itself no longer seemed
so inevitable.  Now she blamed herself for the humiliation to
which she had lowered herself.  "I entreat him to forgive me.  I
have given in to him.  I have owned myself in fault.  What for?
Can't I live without him?"  And leaving unanswered the question
how she was going to live without him, she fell to reading the
signs on the shops.  "Office and warehouse.  Dental surgeon.
Yes, I'll tell Dolly all about it.  She doesn't like Vronsky.  I
shall be sick and ashamed, but I'll tell her.  She loves me, and
I'll follow her advice.  I won't give in to him; I won't let him
train me as he pleases.  Filippov, bun shop.  They say they send
their dough to Petersburg.  The Moscow water is so good for it.
Ah, the springs at Mitishtchen, and the pancakes!"

And she remembered how, long, long ago, when she was a girl of
seventeen, she had gone with her aunt to Troitsa.  "Riding, too.
Was that really me, with red hands?  How much that seemed to me
then splendid and out of reach has become worthless, while what
I had then has gone out of my reach forever!  Could I ever have
believed then that I could come to such humiliation?  How
conceited and self-satisfied he will be when he gets my note!
But I will show him....  How horrid that paint smells!  Why is it
they're always painting and building?  _Modes et robes,_" she read.
A man bowed to her.  It was Annushka's husband.  "Our parasites";
she remembered how Vronsky had said that.  "Our?  Why our?
What's so awful is that one can't tear up the past by its roots.
One can't tear it out, but one can hide one's memory of it.  And
I'll hide it."  And then she thought of her past with Alexey
Alexandrovitch, of how she had blotted the memory of it out of
her life.  "Dolly will think I'm leaving my second husband, and
so I certainly must be in the wrong.  As if I cared to be right!
I can't help it!" she said, and she wanted to cry.  But at once
she fell to wondering what those two girls could be smiling
about.  "Love, most likely.  They don't know how dreary it is,
how low....  The boulevard and the children.  Three boys running,
playing at horses.  Seryozha!  And I'm losing everything and not
getting him back.  Yes, I'm losing everything, if he doesn't
return.  Perhaps he was late for the train and has come back by
now.  Longing for humiliation again!" she said to herself.  "No,
I'll go to Dolly, and say straight out to her, I'm unhappy, I
deserve this, I'm to blame, but still I'm unhappy, help me.
These horses, this carriage--how loathsome I am to myself in this
carriage--all his; but I won't see them again."

Thinking over the words in which she would tell Dolly, and
mentally working her heart up to great bitterness, Anna went
upstairs.

"Is there anyone with her?" she asked in the hall.

"Katerina Alexandrovna Levin," answered the footman.

"Kitty!  Kitty, whom Vronsky was in love with!" thought Anna,
"the girl he thinks of with love.  He's sorry he didn't marry
her.  But me he thinks of with hatred, and is sorry he had
anything to do with me."

The sisters were having a consultation about nursing when Anna
called.  Dolly went down alone to see the visitor who had
interrupted their conversation.

"Well, so you've not gone away yet?  I meant to have come to
you," she said; "I had a letter from Stiva today."

"We had a telegram too," answered Anna, looking round for Kitty.

"He writes that he can't make out quite what Alexey
Alexandrovitch wants, but he won't go away without a decisive
answer."

"I thought you had someone with you.  Can I see the letter?"

"Yes; Kitty," said Dolly, embarrassed.  "She stayed in the
nursery.  She has been very ill."

"So I heard.  May I see the letter?"

"I'll get it directly.  But he doesn't refuse; on the contrary,
Stiva has hopes," said Dolly, stopping in the doorway.

"I haven't, and indeed I don't wish it," said Anna.

"What's this?  Does Kitty consider it degrading to meet me?"
thought Anna when she was alone.  "Perhaps she's right, too.  But
it's not for her, the girl who was in love with Vronsky, it's not
for her to show me that, even if it is true.  I know that in my
position I can't be received by any decent woman.  I knew that
from the first moment I sacrificed everything to him.  And this
is my reward!  Oh, how I hate him!  And what did I come here for?
I'm worse here, more miserable."  She heard from the next room
the sisters' voices in consultation.  "And what am I going to say
to Dolly now?  Amuse Kitty by the sight of my wretchedness,
submit to her patronizing?  No; and besides, Dolly wouldn't
understand.  And it would be no good my telling her.  It would
only be interesting to see Kitty, to show her how I despise
everyone and everything, how nothing matters to me now."

Dolly came in with the letter.  Anna read it and handed it back
in silence.

"I knew all that," she said, "and it doesn't interest me in the
least."

"Oh, why so?  On the contrary, I have hopes," said Dolly, looking
inquisitively at Anna.  She had never seen her in such a
strangely irritable condition.  "When are you going away?" she
asked.

Anna, half-closing her eyes, looked straight before her and did
not answer.

"Why does Kitty shrink from me?" she said, looking at the door
and flushing red.

"Oh, what nonsense!  She's nursing, and things aren't going right
with her, and I've been advising her....  She's delighted.
She'll be here in a minute," said Dolly awkwardly, not clever at
lying.  "Yes, here she is."

Hearing that Anna had called, Kitty had wanted not to appear, but
Dolly persuaded her.  Rallying her forces, Kitty went in, walked
up to her, blushing, and shook hands.

"I am so glad to see you," she said with a trembling voice.

Kitty had been thrown into confusion by the inward conflict
between her antagonism to this bad woman and her desire to be
nice to her.  But as soon as she saw Anna's lovely and attractive
face, all feeling of antagonism disappeared.

"I should not have been surprised if you had not cared to meet
me.  I'm used to everything.  You have been ill?  Yes, you are
changed," said Anna.

Kitty felt that Anna was looking at her with hostile eyes.  She
ascribed this hostility to the awkward position in which Anna,
who had once patronized her, must feel with her now, and she felt
sorry for her.

They talked of Kitty's illness, of the baby, of Stiva, but it was
obvious that nothing interested Anna.

"I came to say good-bye to you," she said, getting up.

"Oh, when are you going?"

But again not answering, Anna turned to Kitty.

"Yes, I am very glad to have seen you," she said with a smile.
"I have heard so much of you from everyone, even from your
husband.  He came to see me, and I liked him exceedingly," she
said, unmistakably with malicious intent.  "Where is he?"

"He has gone back to the country," said Kitty, blushing.

"Remember me to him, be sure you do."

"I'll be sure to!" Kitty said naïvely, looking compassionately
into her eyes.

"So good-bye, Dolly."  And kissing Dolly and shaking hands with
Kitty, Anna went out hurriedly.

"She's just the same and just as charming!  She's very lovely!"
said Kitty, when she was alone with her sister.  "But there's
something piteous about her.  Awfully piteous!"

"Yes, there's something unusual about her today," said Dolly.
"When I went with her into the hall, I fancied she was almost
crying."



Chapter 29


Anna got into the carriage again in an even worse frame of mind
than when she set out from home.  To her previous tortures was
added now that sense of mortification and of being an outcast
which she had felt so distinctly on meeting Kitty.

"Where to?  Home?" asked Pyotr.

"Yes, home," she said, not even thinking now where she was going.

"How they looked at me as something dreadful, incomprehensible,
and curious!  What can he be telling the other with such warmth?"
she thought, staring at two men who walked by.  "Can one ever
tell anyone what one is feeling?  I meant to tell Dolly, and it's
a good thing I didn't tell her.  How pleased she would have been
at my misery!  She would have concealed it, but her chief feeling
would have been delight at my being punished for the happiness
she envied me for.  Kitty, she would have been even more pleased.
How I can see through her!  She knows I was more than usually
sweet to her husband.  And she's jealous and hates me.  And she
despises me.  In her eyes I'm an immoral woman.  If I were an
immoral woman I could have made her husband fall in love with me
...if I'd cared to.  And, indeed, I did care to.  There's someone
who's pleased with himself," she thought, as she saw a fat,
rubicund gentleman coming towards her.  He took her for an
acquaintance, and lifted his glossy hat above his bald, glossy
head, and then perceived his mistake.  "He thought he knew me.
Well, he knows me as well as anyone in the world knows me.  I
don't know myself.  I know my appetites, as the French say.  They
want that dirty ice cream, that they do know for certain," she
thought, looking at two boys stopping an ice cream seller, who
took a barrel off his head and began wiping his perspiring face
with a towel.  "We all want what is sweet and nice.  If not
sweetmeats, then a dirty ice.  And Kitty's the same--if not
Vronsky, then Levin.  And she envies me, and hates me.  And we
all hate each other.  I Kitty, Kitty me.  Yes, that's the truth.
_'Tiutkin, coiffeur.'  Je me fais coiffer par Tiutkin...._  I'll
tell him that when he comes," she thought and smiled.  But the
same instant she remembered that she had no one now to tell
anything amusing to.  "And there's nothing amusing, nothing
mirthful, really.  It's all hateful.  They're singing for
vespers, and how carefully that merchant crosses himself! as if
he were afraid of missing something.  Why these churches and this
singing and this humbug?  Simply to conceal that we all hate each
other like these cab drivers who are abusing each other so
angrily.  Yashvin says, 'He wants to strip me of my shirt, and I
him of his.' Yes, that's the truth!"

She was plunged in these thoughts, which so engrossed her that
she left off thinking of her own position, when the carriage drew
up at the steps of her house.  It was only when she saw the
porter running out to meet her that she remembered she had sent
the note and the telegram.

"Is there an answer?" she inquired.

"I'll see this minute," answered the porter, and glancing into
his room, he took out and gave her the thin square envelope of a
telegram.  "I can't come before ten o'clock.--Vronsky," she
read.

"And hasn't the messenger come back?"

"No," answered the porter.

"Then, since it's so, I know what I must do," she said, and
feeling a vague fury and craving for revenge rising up within
her, she ran upstairs.  "I'll go to him myself.  Before going
away forever, I'll tell him all.  Never have I hated anyone as I
hate that man!" she thought.  Seeing his hat on the rack, she
shuddered with aversion.  She did not consider that his telegram
was an answer to her telegram and that he had not yet received
her note.  She pictured him to herself as talking calmly to his
mother and Princess Sorokina and rejoicing at her sufferings.
"Yes, I must go quickly," she said, not knowing yet where she was
going.  She longed to get away as quickly as possible from the
feelings she had gone through in that awful house.  The servants,
the walls, the things in that house--all aroused repulsion and
hatred in her and lay like a weight upon her.

"Yes, I must go to the railway station, and if he's not there,
then go there and catch him."  Anna looked at the railway
timetable in the newspapers.  An evening train went at two
minutes past eight.  "Yes, I shall be in time."  She gave orders
for the other horses to be put in the carriage, and packed in a
traveling-bag the things needed for a few days.  She knew she
would never come back here again.

Among the plans that came into her head she vaguely determined
that after what would happen at the station or at the countess's
house, she would go as far as the first town on the Nizhni road
and stop there.

Dinner was on the table; she went up, but the smell of the bread
and cheese was enough to make her feel that all food was
disgusting.  She ordered the carriage and went out.  The house
threw a shadow now right across the street, but it was a bright
evening and still warm in the sunshine.  Annushka, who came down
with her things, and Pyotr, who put the things in the carriage,
and the coachman, evidently out of humor, were all hateful to
her, and irritated her by their words and actions.

"I don't want you, Pyotr."

"But how about the ticket?"

"Well, as you like, it doesn't matter," she said crossly.

Pyotr jumped on the box, and putting his arms akimbo, told the
coachman to drive to the booking-office.



Chapter 30


"Here it is again!  Again I understand it all!" Anna said to
herself, as soon as the carriage had started and swaying lightly,
rumbled over the tiny cobbles of the paved road, and again one
impression followed rapidly upon another.

"Yes; what was the last thing I thought of so clearly?" she tried
to recall it.  "_'Tiutkin, coiffeur?'_--no, not that.  Yes, of what
Yashvin says, the struggle for existence and hatred is the one
thing that holds men together.  No, it's a useless journey you're
making," she said, mentally addressing a party in a coach and
four, evidently going for an excursion into the country.  "And
the dog you're taking with you will be no help to you.  You can't
get away from yourselves."  Turning her eyes in the direction
Pyotr had turned to look, she saw a factory hand almost dead
drunk, with hanging head, being led away by a policeman.  "Come,
he's found a quicker way," she thought.  "Count Vronsky and I did
not find that happiness either, though we expected so much from
it."  And now for the first time Anna turned that glaring light
in which she was seeing everything on to her relations with him,
which she had hitherto avoided thinking about.  "What was it he
sought in me?  Not love so much as the satisfaction of vanity."
She remembered his words, the expression of his face, that
recalled an abject setter-dog, in the early days of their
connection.  And everything now confirmed this.  "Yes, there was
the triumph of success in him.  Of course there was love too, but
the chief element was the pride of success.  He boasted of me.
Now that's over.  There's nothing to be proud of.  Not to be
proud of, but to be ashamed of.  He has taken from me all he
could, and now I am no use to him.  He is weary of me and is
trying not to be dishonorable in his behavior to me.  He let that
out yesterday--he wants divorce and marriage so as to burn his
ships.  He loves me, but how?  The zest is gone, as the English
say.  That fellow wants everyone to admire him and is very much
pleased with himself," she thought, looking at a red-faced clerk,
riding on a riding school horse.  "Yes, there's not the same
flavor about me for him now.  If I go away from him, at the
bottom of his heart he will be glad."

This was not mere supposition, she saw it distinctly in the
piercing light, which revealed to her now the meaning of life and
human relations.

"My love keeps growing more passionate and egoistic, while his is
waning and waning, and that's why we're drifting apart."  She
went on musing.  "And there's no help for it.  He is everything
for me, and I want him more and more to give himself up to me
entirely.  And he wants more and more to get away from me.  We
walked to meet each other up to the time of our love, and then we
have been irresistibly drifting in different directions.  And
there's no altering that.  He tells me I'm insanely jealous, and
I have told myself that I am insanely jealous; but it's not true.
I'm not jealous, but I'm unsatisfied.  But..." she opened her
lips, and shifted her place in the carriage in the excitement,
aroused by the thought that suddenly struck her.  "If I could be
anything but a mistress, passionately caring for nothing but his
caresses; but I can't and I don't care to be anything else.  And
by that desire I rouse aversion in him, and he rouses fury in me,
and it cannot be different.  Don't I know that he wouldn't
deceive me, that he has no schemes about Princess Sorokina, that
he's not in love with Kitty, that he won't desert me!  I know all
that, but it makes it no better for me.  If without loving me,
from _duty_ he'll be good and kind to me, without what I want,
that's a thousand times worse than unkindness!  That's--hell!
And that's just how it is.  For a long while now he hasn't loved
me.  And where love ends, hate begins.  I don't know these
streets at all.  Hills it seems, and still houses, and houses
....  And in the houses always people and people....  How many of
them, no end, and all hating each other!  Come, let me try and
think what I want, to make me happy.  Well?  Suppose I am
divorced, and Alexey Alexandrovitch lets me have Seryozha, and I
marry Vronsky."  Thinking of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she at once
pictured him with extraordinary vividness as though he were alive
before her, with his mild, lifeless, dull eyes, the blue veins in
his white hands, his intonations and the cracking of his fingers,
and remembering the feeling which had existed between them, and
which was also called love, she shuddered with loathing.  "Well,
I'm divorced, and become Vronsky's wife.  Well, will Kitty cease
looking at me as she looked at me today?  No.  And will Seryozha
leave off asking and wondering about my two husbands?  And is
there any new feeling I can awaken between Vronsky and me?  Is
there possible, if not happiness, some sort of ease from misery?
No, no!" she answered now without the slightest hesitation.
"Impossible!  We are drawn apart by life, and I make his
unhappiness, and he mine, and there's no altering him or me.
Every attempt has been made, the screw has come unscrewed.  Oh, a
beggar woman with a baby.  She thinks I'm sorry for her.  Aren't
we all flung into the world only to hate each other, and so to
torture ourselves and each other?  Schoolboys coming--laughing
Seryozha?" she thought.  "I thought, too, that I loved him, and
used to be touched by my own tenderness.  But I have lived
without him, I gave him up for another love, and did not regret
the exchange till that love was satisfied."  And with loathing
she thought of what she meant by that love.  And the clearness
with which she saw life now, her own and all men's, was a
pleasure to her.  "It's so with me and Pyotr, and the coachman,
Fyodor, and that merchant, and all the people living along the
Volga, where those placards invite one to go, and everywhere and
always," she thought when she had driven under the low-pitched
roof of the Nizhigorod station, and the porters ran to meet her.

"A ticket to Obiralovka?" said Pyotr.

She had utterly forgotten where and why she was going, and only
by a great effort she understood the question.

"Yes," she said, handing him her purse, and taking a little red
bag in her hand, she got out of the carriage.

Making her way through the crowd to the first-class waiting-room,
she gradually recollected all the details of her position, and
the plans between which she was hesitating.  And again at the old
sore places, hope and then despair poisoned the wounds of her
tortured, fearfully throbbing heart.  As she sat on the
star-shaped sofa waiting for the train, she gazed with aversion
at the people coming and going (they were all hateful to her),
and thought how she would arrive at the station, would write him
a note, and what she would write to him, and how he was at this
moment complaining to his mother of his position, not
understanding her sufferings, and how she would go into the room,
and what she would say to him.  Then she thought that life might
still be happy, and how miserably she loved and hated him, and
how fearfully her heart was beating.



Chapter 31


A bell rang, some young men, ugly and impudent, and at the same
time careful of the impression they were making, hurried by.
Pyotr, too, crossed the room in his livery and top-boots, with
his dull, animal face, and came up to her to take her to the
train.  Some noisy men were quiet as she passed them on the
platform, and one whispered something about her to another--
something vile, no doubt.  She stepped up on the high step, and
sat down in a carriage by herself on a dirty seat that had been
white.  Her bag lay beside her, shaken up and down by the
springiness of the seat.  With a foolish smile Pyotr raised his
hat, with its colored band, at the window, in token of farewell;
an impudent conductor slammed the door and the latch.  A
grotesque-looking lady wearing a bustle (Anna mentally undressed
the woman, and was appalled at her hideousness), and a little
girl laughing affectedly ran down the platform.

"Katerina Andreevna, she's got them all, _ma tante!_" cried the
girl.

"Even the child's hideous and affected," thought Anna.  To avoid
seeing anyone, she got up quickly and seated herself at the
opposite window of the empty carriage.  A misshapen-looking
peasant covered with dirt, in a cap from which his tangled hair
stuck out all round, passed by that window, stooping down to the
carriage wheels.  "There's something familiar about that hideous
peasant," thought Anna.  And remembering her dream, she moved
away to the opposite door, shaking with terror.  The conductor
opened the door and let in a man and his wife.

"Do you wish to get out?"

Anna made no answer.  The conductor and her two fellow-passengers
did not notice under her veil her panic-stricken face.  She went
back to her corner and sat down.  The couple seated themselves on
the opposite side, and intently but surreptitiously scrutinized
her clothes.  Both husband and wife seemed repulsive to Anna.
The husband asked, would she allow him to smoke, obviously not
with a view to smoking but to getting into conversation with her.
Receiving her assent, he said to his wife in French something
about caring less to smoke than to talk.  They made inane and
affected remarks to one another, entirely for her benefit.  Anna
saw clearly that they were sick of each other, and hated each
other.  And no one could have helped hating such miserable
monstrosities.

A second bell sounded, and was followed by moving of luggage,
noise, shouting and laughter.  It was so clear to Anna that there
was nothing for anyone to be glad of, that this laughter
irritated her agonizingly, and she would have liked to stop up
her ears not to hear it.  At last the third bell rang, there was
a whistle and a hiss of steam, and a clank of chains, and the man
in her carriage crossed himself.  "It would be interesting to ask
him what meaning he attaches to that," thought Anna, looking
angrily at him.  She looked past the lady out of the window at
the people who seemed whirling by as they ran beside the train or
stood on the platform.  The train, jerking at regular intervals
at the junctions of the rails, rolled by the platform, past a
stone wall, a signal-box, past other trains; the wheels, moving
more smoothly and evenly, resounded with a slight clang on the
rails.  The window was lighted up by the bright evening sun, and
a slight breeze fluttered the curtain.  Anna forgot her fellow
passengers, and to the light swaying of the train she fell to
thinking again, as she breathed the fresh air.

"Yes, what did I stop at?  That I couldn't conceive a position in
which life would not be a misery, that we are all created to be
miserable, and that we all know it, and all invent means of
deceiving each other.  And when one sees the truth, what is one
to do?"

"That's what reason is given man for, to escape from what worries
him," said the lady in French, lisping affectedly, and obviously
pleased with her phrase.

The words seemed an answer to Anna's thoughts.

"To escape from what worries him," repeated Anna.  And glancing
at the red-cheeked husband and the thin wife, she saw that the
sickly wife considered herself misunderstood, and the husband
deceived her and encouraged her in that idea of herself.  Anna
seemed to see all their history and all the crannies of their
souls, as it were turning a light upon them.  But there was
nothing interesting in them, and she pursued her thought.

"Yes, I'm very much worried, and that's what reason was given me
for, to escape; so then one must escape: why not put out the
light when there's nothing more to look at, when it's sickening
to look at it all?  But how?  Why did the conductor run along the
footboard, why are they shrieking, those young men in that train?
why are they talking, why are they laughing?  It's all falsehood,
all lying, all humbug, all cruelty!..."

When the train came into the station, Anna got out into the crowd
of passengers, and moving apart from them as if they were lepers,
she stood on the platform, trying to think what she had come here
for, and what she meant to do.  Everything that had seemed to her
possible before was now so difficult to consider, especially in
this noisy crowd of hideous people who would not leave her alone.
One moment porters ran up to her proffering their services, then
young men, clacking their heels on the planks of the platform and
talking loudly, stared at her; people meeting her dodged past on
the wrong side.  Remembering that she had meant to go on further
if there were no answer, she stopped a porter and asked if her
coachman were not here with a note from Count Vronsky.

"Count Vronsky?  They sent up here from the Vronskys just this
minute, to meet Princess Sorokina and her daughter.  And what is
the coachman like?"

Just as she was talking to the porter, the coachman Mihail, red
and cheerful in his smart blue coat and chain, evidently proud of
having so successfully performed his commission, came up to her
and gave her a letter.  She broke it open, and her heart ached
before she had read it.

"I am very sorry your note did not reach me.  I will be home at
ten," Vronsky had written carelessly....

"Yes, that's what I expected!" she said to herself with an evil
smile.

"Very good, you can go home then," she said softly, addressing
Mihail.  She spoke softly because the rapidity of her heart's
beating hindered her breathing.  "No, I won't let you make me
miserable," she thought menacingly, addressing not him, not
herself, but the power that made her suffer, and she walked along
the platform.

Two maidservants walking along the platform turned their heads,
staring at her and making some remarks about her dress.  "Real,"
they said of the lace she was wearing.  The young men would not
leave her in peace.  Again they passed by, peering into her face,
and with a laugh shouting something in an unnatural voice.  The
station-master coming up asked her whether she was going by
train.  A boy selling kvas never took his eyes off her.  "My God!
where am I to go?" she thought, going farther and farther along
the platform.  At the end she stopped.  Some ladies and children,
who had come to meet a gentleman in spectacles, paused in their
loud laughter and talking, and stared at her as she reached them.
She quickened her pace and walked away from them to the edge of
the platform.  A luggage train was coming in.  The platform began
to sway, and she fancied she was in the train again.

And all at once she thought of the man crushed by the train the
day she had first met Vronsky, and she knew what she had to do.
With a rapid, light step she went down the steps that led from
the tank to the rails and stopped quite near the approaching
train.

She looked at the lower part of the carriages, at the screws and
chains and the tall cast-iron wheel of the first carriage slowly
moving up, and trying to measure the middle between the front and
back wheels, and the very minute when that middle point would be
opposite her.

"There," she said to herself, looking into the shadow of the
carriage, at the sand and coal dust which covered the sleepers--
"there, in the very middle, and I will punish him and escape
from everyone and from myself."

She tried to fling herself below the wheels of the first carriage
as it reached her; but the red bag which she tried to drop out of
her hand delayed her, and she was too late; she missed the
moment.  She had to wait for the next carriage.  A feeling such
as she had known when about to take the first plunge in bathing
came upon her, and she crossed herself.  That familiar gesture
brought back into her soul a whole series of girlish and childish
memories, and suddenly the darkness that had covered everything
for her was torn apart, and life rose up before her for an
instant with all its bright past joys.  But she did not take her
eyes from the wheels of the second carriage.  And exactly at the
moment when the space between the wheels came opposite her, she
dropped the red bag, and drawing her head back into her
shoulders, fell on her hands under the carriage, and lightly, as
though she would rise again at once, dropped on to her knees.
And at the same instant she was terror-stricken at what she was
doing.  "Where am I?  What am I doing?  What for?" She tried to
get up, to drop backwards; but something huge and merciless
struck her on the head and rolled her on her back.  "Lord,
forgive me all!" she said, feeling it impossible to struggle.  A
peasant muttering something was working at the iron above her.
And the light by which she had read the book filled with
troubles, falsehoods, sorrow, and evil, flared up more brightly
than ever before, lighted up for her all that had been in
darkness, flickered, began to grow dim, and was quenched forever.





PART 8




Chapter 1


Almost two months had passed.  The hot summer was half over, but
Sergey Ivanovitch was only just preparing to leave Moscow.

Sergey Ivanovitch's life had not been uneventful during this
time.  A year ago he had finished his book, the fruit of six
years' labor, "Sketch of a Survey of the Principles and Forms of
Government in Europe and Russia."  Several sections of this book
and its introduction had appeared in periodical publications, and
other parts had been read by Sergey Ivanovitch to persons of his
circle, so that the leading ideas of the work could not be
completely novel to the public.  But still Sergey Ivanovitch had
expected that on its appearance his book would be sure to make a
serious impression on society, and if it did not cause a
revolution in social science it would, at any rate, make a great
stir in the scientific world.

After the most conscientious revision the book had last year been
published, and had been distributed among the booksellers.

Though he asked no one about it, reluctantly and with feigned
indifference answered his friends' inquiries as to how the book
was going, and did not even inquire of the booksellers how the
book was selling, Sergey Ivanovitch was all on the alert, with
strained attention, watching for the first impression his book
would make in the world and in literature.

But a week passed, a second, a third, and in society no
impression whatever could be detected.  His friends who were
specialists and savants, occasionally--unmistakably from
politeness--alluded to it.  The rest of his acquaintances, not
interested in a book on a learned subject, did not talk of it at
all.  And society generally--just now especially absorbed in
other things--was absolutely indifferent.  In the press, too, for
a whole month there was not a word about his book.

Sergey Ivanovitch had calculated to a nicety the time necessary
for writing a review, but a month passed, and a second, and still
there was silence.

Only in the _Northern Beetle_, in a comic article on the singer
Drabanti, who had lost his voice, there was a contemptuous
allusion to Koznishev's book, suggesting that the book had been
long ago seen through by everyone, and was a subject of general
ridicule.

At last in the third month a critical article appeared in a
serious review.  Sergey Ivanovitch knew the author of the
article.  He had met him once at Golubtsov's.

The author of the article was a young man, an invalid, very bold
as a writer, but extremely deficient in breeding and shy in
personal relations.

In spite of his absolute contempt for the author, it was with
complete respect that Sergey Ivanovitch set about reading the
article.  The article was awful.

The critic had undoubtedly put an interpretation upon the book
which could not possibly be put on it.  But he had selected
quotations so adroitly that for people who had not read the book
(and obviously scarcely anyone had read it) it seemed absolutely
clear that the whole book was nothing but a medley of high-flown
phrases, not even--as suggested by marks of interrogation--used
appropriately, and that the author of the book was a person
absolutely without knowledge of the subject.  And all this was
so wittily done that Sergey Ivanovitch would not have disowned
such wit himself.  But that was just what was so awful.

In spite of the scrupulous conscientiousness with which Sergey
Ivanovitch verified the correctness of the critic's arguments, he
did not for a minute stop to ponder over the faults and mistakes
which were ridiculed; but unconsciously he began immediately
trying to recall every detail of his meeting and conversation
with the author of the article.

"Didn't I offend him in some way?" Sergey Ivanovitch wondered.

And remembering that when they met he had corrected the young man
about something he had said that betrayed ignorance, Sergey
Ivanovitch found the clue to explain the article.

This article was followed by a deadly silence about the book both
in the press and in conversation, and Sergey Ivanovitch saw that
his six years' task, toiled at with such love and labor, had
gone, leaving no trace.

Sergey Ivanovitch's position was still more difficult from the
fact that, since he had finished his book, he had had no more
literary work to do, such as had hitherto occupied the greater
part of his time.

Sergey Ivanovitch was clever, cultivated, healthy, and energetic,
and he did not know what use to make of his energy.
Conversations in drawing rooms, in meetings, assemblies, and
committees--everywhere where talk was possible--took up part of
his time.  But being used for years to town life, he did not
waste all his energies in talk, as his less experienced younger
brother did, when he was in Moscow.  He had a great deal of
leisure and intellectual energy still to dispose of.

Fortunately for him, at this period so difficult for him from the
failure of his book, the various public questions of the
dissenting sects, of the American alliance, of the Samara famine,
of exhibitions, and of spiritualism, were definitely replaced in
public interest by the Slavonic question, which had hitherto
rather languidly interested society, and Sergey Ivanovitch, who
had been one of the first to raise this subject, threw himself
into it heart and soul.

In the circle to which Sergey Ivanovitch belonged, nothing was
talked of or written about just now but the Servian War.
Everything that the idle crowd usually does to kill time was done
now for the benefit of the Slavonic States.  Balls, concerts,
dinners, matchboxes, ladies' dresses, beer, restaurants--
everything testified to sympathy with the Slavonic peoples.

From much of what was spoken and written on the subject, Sergey
Ivanovitch differed on various points.  He saw that the Slavonic
question had become one of those fashionable distractions which
succeed one another in providing society with an object and an
occupation.  He saw, too, that a great many people were taking up
the subject from motives of self-interest and self-advertisement.
He recognized that the newspapers published a great deal that was
superfluous and exaggerated, with the sole aim of attracting
attention and outbidding one another.  He saw that in this
general movement those who thrust themselves most forward and
shouted the loudest were men who had failed and were smarting
under a sense of injury--generals without armies, ministers not
in the ministry, journalists not on any paper, party leaders
without followers.  He saw that there was a great deal in it that
was frivolous and absurd.  But he saw and recognized an
unmistakable growing enthusiasm, uniting all classes, with which
it was impossible not to sympathize.  The massacre of men who
were fellow Christians, and of the same Slavonic race, excited
sympathy for the sufferers and indignation against the
oppressors.  And the heroism of the Servians and Montenegrins
struggling for a great cause begot in the whole people a longing
to help their brothers not in word but in deed.

But in this there was another aspect that rejoiced Sergey
Ivanovitch.  That was the manifestation of public opinion.  The
public had definitely expressed its desire.  The soul of the
people had, as Sergey Ivanovitch said, found expression.  And the
more he worked in this cause, the more incontestable it seemed to
him that it was a cause destined to assume vast dimensions, to
create an epoch.

He threw himself heart and soul into the service of this great
cause, and forgot to think about his book.  His whole time now
was engrossed by it, so that he could scarcely manage to answer
all the letters and appeals addressed to him.  He worked the
whole spring and part of the summer, and it was only in July that
he prepared to go away to his brother's in the country.

He was going both to rest for a fortnight, and in the very heart
of the people, in the farthest wilds of the country, to enjoy the
sight of that uplifting of the spirit of the people, of which,
like all residents in the capital and big towns, he was fully
persuaded.  Katavasov had long been meaning to carry out his
promise to stay with Levin, and so he was going with him.



Chapter 2


Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had only just reached the station
of the Kursk line, which was particularly busy and full of
people that day, when, looking round for the groom who was
following with their things, they saw a party of volunteers
driving up in four cabs.  Ladies met them with bouquets of
flowers, and followed by the rushing crowd they went into the
station.

One of the ladies, who had met the volunteers, came out of the
hall and addressed Sergey Ivanovitch.

"You too come to see them off?" she asked in French.

"No, I'm going away myself, princess.  To my brother's for a
holiday.  Do you always see them off?" said Sergey Ivanovitch with
a hardly perceptible smile.

"Oh, that would be impossible!" answered the princess.  "Is it
true that eight hundred have been sent from us already?
Malvinsky wouldn't believe me."

"More than eight hundred.  If you reckon those who have been sent
not directly from Moscow, over a thousand," answered Sergey
Ivanovitch.

"There! That's just what I said!" exclaimed the lady.  "And it's
true too, I suppose, that more than a million has been
subscribed?"

"Yes, princess."

"What do you say to today's telegram?  Beaten the Turks again."

"Yes, so I saw," answered Sergey Ivanovitch.  They were speaking
of the last telegram stating that the Turks had been for three
days in succession beaten at all points and put to flight, and
that tomorrow a decisive engagement was expected.

"Ah, by the way, a splendid young fellow has asked leave to go,
and they've made some difficulty, I don't know why.  I meant to
ask you; I know him; please write a note about his case.  He's
being sent by Countess Lidia Ivanovna."

Sergey Ivanovitch asked for all the details the princess knew
about the young man, and going into the first-class waiting-room,
wrote a note to the person on whom the granting of leave of
absence depended, and handed it to the princess.

"You know Count Vronsky, the notorious one...is going by this
train?" said the princess with a smile full of triumph and
meaning, when he found her again and gave her the letter.

"I had heard he was going, but I did not know when.  By this
train?"

"I've seen him.  He's here: there's only his mother seeing him
off.  It's the best thing, anyway, that he could do."

"Oh, yes, of course."

While they were talking the crowd streamed by them into the
dining room.  They went forward too, and heard a gentleman with a
glass in his hand delivering a loud discourse to the volunteers.
"In the service of religion, humanity, and our brothers," the
gentleman said, his voice growing louder and louder; "to this
great cause mother Moscow dedicates you with her blessing.
_Jivio!_" he concluded, loudly and tearfully.

Everyone shouted _Jivio!_ and a fresh crowd dashed into the hall,
almost carrying the princess off her legs.

"Ah, princess! that was something like!" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, suddenly appearing in the middle of the crowd and
beaming upon them with a delighted smile.  "Capitally, warmly
said, wasn't it?  Bravo!  And Sergey Ivanovitch!  Why, you ought
to have said something--just a few words, you know, to encourage
them; you do that so well," he added with a soft, respectful, and
discreet smile, moving Sergey Ivanovitch forward a little by the
arm.

"No, I'm just off."

"Where to?"

"To the country, to my brother's," answered Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Then you'll see my wife.  I've written to her, but you'll see
her first.  Please tell her that they've seen me and that it's
'all right,' as the English say.  She'll understand.  Oh, and be
so good as to tell her I'm appointed secretary of the
committee....  But she'll understand!  You know, _les petites
misères de la vie humaine,_" he said, as it were apologizing to
the princess.  "And Princess Myakaya--not Liza, but Bibish--is
sending a thousand guns and twelve nurses.  Did I tell you?"

"Yes, I heard so," answered Koznishev indifferently.

"It's a pity you're going away," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Tomorrow we're giving a dinner to two who're setting off--
Dimer-Bartnyansky from Petersburg and our Veslovsky, Grisha.
They're both going.  Veslovsky's only lately married.  There's a
fine fellow for you!  Eh, princess?" he turned to the lady.

The princess looked at Koznishev without replying.  But the fact
that Sergey Ivanovitch and the princess seemed anxious to get rid
of him did not in the least disconcert Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Smiling, he stared at the feather in the princess's hat, and then
about him as though he were going to pick something up.  Seeing a
lady approaching with a collecting box, he beckoned her up and
put in a five-rouble note.

"I can never see these collecting boxes unmoved while I've money
in my pocket," he said.  "And how about today's telegram?  Fine
chaps those Montenegrins!"

"You don't say so!" he cried, when the princess told him that
Vronsky was going by this train.  For an instant Stepan
Arkadyevitch's face looked sad, but a minute later, when,
stroking his mustaches and swinging as he walked, he went into
the hall where Vronsky was, he had completely forgotten his own
despairing sobs over his sister's corpse, and he saw in Vronsky
only a hero and an old friend.

"With all his faults one can't refuse to do him justice," said
the princess to Sergey Ivanovitch as soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch
had left them.  "What a typically Russian, Slav nature!  Only,
I'm afraid it won't be pleasant for Vronsky to see him.  Say what
you will, I'm touched by that man's fate.  Do talk to him a
little on the way," said the princess.

"Yes, perhaps, if it happens so."

"I never liked him.  But this atones for a great deal.  He's not
merely going himself, he's taking a squadron at his own expense."

"Yes, so I heard."

A bell sounded.  Everyone crowded to the doors. "Here he is!" said
the princess, indicating Vronsky, who with his mother on his arm
walked by, wearing a long overcoat and wide-brimmed black hat.
Oblonsky was walking beside him, talking eagerly of something.

Vronsky was frowning and looking straight before him, as though
he did not hear what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.

Probably on Oblonsky's pointing them out, he looked round in the
direction where the princess and Sergey Ivanovitch were standing,
and without speaking lifted his hat.  His face, aged and worn by
suffering, looked stony.

Going onto the platform, Vronsky left his mother and disappeared
into a compartment.

On the platform there rang out "God save the Tsar," then shouts
of "hurrah!" and _"jivio!"_  One of the volunteers, a tall, very
young man with a hollow chest, was particularly conspicuous,
bowing and waving his felt hat and a nosegay over his head.  Then
two officers emerged, bowing too, and a stout man with a big
beard, wearing a greasy forage cap.



Chapter 3


Saying good-bye to the princess, Sergey Ivanovitch was joined by
Katavasov; together they got into a carriage full to overflowing,
and the train started.

At Tsaritsino station the train was met by a chorus of young men
singing "Hail to Thee!"  Again the volunteers bowed and poked
their heads out, but Sergey Ivanovitch paid no attention to them.
He had had so much to do with the volunteers that the type was
familiar to him and did not interest him.  Katavasov, whose
scientific work had prevented his having a chance of observing
them hitherto, was very much interested in them and questioned
Sergey Ivanovitch.

Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to go into the second-class and
talk to them himself.  At the next station Katavasov acted on
this suggestion.

At the first stop he moved into the second-class and made the
acquaintance of the volunteers.  They were sitting in a corner of
the carriage, talking loudly and obviously aware that the
attention of the passengers and Katavasov as he got in was
concentrated upon them.  More loudly than all talked the tall,
hollow-chested young man.  He was unmistakably tipsy, and was
relating some story that had occurred at his school.  Facing him
sat a middle-aged officer in the Austrian military jacket of the
Guards uniform.  He was listening with a smile to the hollow-
chested youth, and occasionally pulling him up.  The third, in an
artillery uniform, was sitting on a box beside them.  A fourth
was asleep.

Entering into conversation with the youth, Katavasov learned that
he was a wealthy Moscow merchant who had run through a large
fortune before he was two-and-twenty.  Katavasov did not like
him, because he was unmanly and effeminate and sickly.  He was
obviously convinced, especially now after drinking, that he was
performing a heroic action, and he bragged of it in the most
unpleasant way.

The second, the retired officer, made an unpleasant impression
too upon Katavasov.  He was, it seemed, a man who had tried
everything.  He had been on a railway, had been a land-steward,
and had started factories, and he talked, quite without
necessity, of all he had done, and used learned expressions quite
inappropriately.

The third, the artilleryman, on the contrary, struck Katavasov
very favorably.  He was a quiet, modest fellow, unmistakably
impressed by the knowledge of the officer and the heroic
self-sacrifice of the merchant and saying nothing about himself.
When Katavasov asked him what had impelled him to go to Servia,
he answered modestly:

"Oh, well, everyone's going.  The Servians want help, too.  I'm
sorry for them."

"Yes, you artillerymen especially are scarce there," said
Katavasov.

"Oh, I wasn't long in the artillery, maybe they'll put me into
the infantry or the cavalry."

"Into the infantry when they need artillery more than anything?"
said Katavasov, fancying from the artilleryman's apparent age
that he must have reached a fairly high grade.

"I wasn't long in the artillery; I'm a cadet retired," he said,
and he began to explain how he had failed in his examination.

All of this together made a disagreeable impression on Katavasov,
and when the volunteers got out at a station for a drink,
Katavasov would have liked to compare his unfavorable impression
in conversation with someone.  There was an old man in the
carriage, wearing a military overcoat, who had been listening all
the while to Katavasov's conversation with the volunteers.  When
they were left alone, Katavasov addressed him.

"What different positions they come from, all those fellows who
are going off there," Katavasov said vaguely, not wishing to
express his own opinion, and at the same time anxious to find out
the old man's views.

The old man was an officer who had served on two campaigns.  He
knew what makes a soldier, and judging by the appearance and the
talk of those persons, by the swagger with which they had
recourse to the bottle on the journey, he considered them poor
soldiers.  Moreover, he lived in a district town, and he was
longing to tell how one soldier had volunteered from his town, a
drunkard and a thief whom no one would employ as a laborer.  But
knowing by experience that in the present condition of the public
temper it was dangerous to express an opinion opposed to the
general one, and especially to criticize the volunteers
unfavorably, he too watched Katavasov without committing himself.

"Well, men are wanted there," he said, laughing with his eyes.
And they fell to talking of the last war news, and each concealed
from the other his perplexity as to the engagement expected next
day, since the Turks had been beaten, according to the latest
news, at all points.  And so they parted, neither giving
expression to his opinion.

Katavasov went back to his own carriage, and with reluctant
hypocrisy reported to Sergey Ivanovitch his observations of the
volunteers, from which it would appear that they were capital
fellows.

At a big station at a town the volunteers were again greeted with
shouts and singing, again men and women with collecting boxes
appeared, and provincial ladies brought bouquets to the
volunteers and followed them into the refreshment room; but all
this was on a much smaller and feebler scale than in Moscow.



Chapter 4


While the train was stopping at the provincial town, Sergey
Ivanovitch did not go to the refreshment room, but walked up and
down the platform.

The first time he passed Vronsky's compartment he noticed that
the curtain was drawn over the window; but as he passed it the
second time he saw the old countess at the window.  She beckoned
to Koznishev.

"I'm going, you see, taking him as far as Kursk," she said.

"Yes, so I heard," said Sergey Ivanovitch, standing at her window
and peeping in.  "What a noble act on his part!" he added,
noticing that Vronsky was not in the compartment.

"Yes, after his misfortune, what was there for him to do?"

"What a terrible thing it was!" said Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Ah, what I have been through!  But do get in....  Ah, what I
have been through!" she repeated, when Sergey Ivanovitch had got
in and sat down beside her.  "You can't conceive it!  For six
weeks he did not speak to anyone, and would not touch food
except when I implored him.  And not for one minute could we
leave him alone.  We took away everything he could have used
against himself.  We lived on the ground floor, but there was no
reckoning on anything.  You know, of course, that he had shot
himself once already on her account," she said, and the old
lady's eyelashes twitched at the recollection.  "Yes, hers was
the fitting end for such a woman.  Even the death she chose was
low and vulgar."

"It's not for us to judge, countess," said Sergey Ivanovitch;
"but I can understand that it has been very hard for you."

"Ah, don't speak of it!  I was staying on my estate, and he was
with me.  A note was brought him.  He wrote an answer and sent it
off.  We hadn't an idea that she was close by at the station.  In
the evening I had only just gone to my room, when my Mary told me
a lady had thrown herself under the train.  Something seemed to
strike me at once.  I knew it was she.  The first thing I said
was, he was not to be told.  But they'd told him already.  His
coachman was there and saw it all.  When I ran into his room, he
was beside himself--it was fearful to see him.  He didn't say a
word, but galloped off there.  I don't know to this day what
happened there, but he was brought back at death's door.  I
shouldn't have known him.  _Prostration complete,_ the doctor said.
And that was followed almost by madness.  Oh, why talk of it!"
said the countess with a wave of her hand.  "It was an awful
time!  No, say what you will, she was a bad woman.  Why, what is
the meaning of such desperate passions?  It was all to show
herself something out of the way.  Well, and that she did do.
She brought herself to ruin and two good men--her husband and my
unhappy son."

"And what did her husband do?" asked Sergey Ivanovitch.

"He has taken her daughter.  Alexey was ready to agree to
anything at first.  Now it worries him terribly that he should
have given his own child away to another man.  But he can't take
back his word.  Karenin came to the funeral.  But we tried to
prevent his meeting Alexey.  For him, for her husband, it was
easier, anyway.  She had set him free.  But my poor son was
utterly given up to her.  He had thrown up everything, his
career, me, and even then she had no mercy on him, but of set
purpose she made his ruin complete.  No, say what you will, her
very death was the death of a vile woman, of no religious
feeling.  God forgive me, but I can't help hating the memory of
her, when I look at my son's misery!"

"But how is he now?"

"It was a blessing from Providence for us--this Servian war.  I'm
old, and I don't understand the rights and wrongs of it, but it's
come as a providential blessing to him.  Of course for me, as his
mother, it's terrible; and what's worse, they say, _ce n'est pas
très bien vu a Pétersbourg_.  But it can't be helped!  It was the
one thing that could rouse him.  Yashvin--a friend of his--he had
lost all he had at cards and he was going to Servia.  He came to
see him and persuaded him to go.  Now it's an interest for him.
Do please talk to him a little.  I want to distract his mind.
He's so low-spirited.  And as bad luck would have it, he has
toothache too.  But he'll be delighted to see you.  Please do
talk to him; he's walking up and down on that side."

Sergey Ivanovitch said he would be very glad to, and crossed over
to the other side of the station.



Chapter 5


In the slanting evening shadows cast by the baggage piled up on
the platform, Vronsky in his long overcoat and slouch hat, with
his hands in his pockets, strode up and down, like a wild beast
in a cage, turning sharply after twenty paces.  Sergey Ivanovitch
fancied, as he approached him, that Vronsky saw him but was
pretending not to see.  This did not affect Sergey Ivanovitch in
the slightest.  He was above all personal considerations with
Vronsky.

At that moment Sergey Ivanovitch looked upon Vronsky as a man
taking an important part in a great cause, and Koznishev thought
it his duty to encourage him and express his approval.  He went
up to him.

Vronsky stood still, looked intently at him, recognized him, and
going a few steps forward to meet him, shook hands with him very
warmly.

"Possibly you didn't wish to see me," said Sergey Ivanovitch,
"but couldn't I be of use to you?"

"There's no one I should less dislike seeing than you," said
Vronsky.  "Excuse me; and there's nothing in life for me to
like."

"I quite understand, and I merely meant to offer you my
services," said Sergey Ivanovitch, scanning Vronsky's face, full
of unmistakable suffering.  "Wouldn't it be of use to you to have
a letter to Ristitch--to Milan?"

"Oh, no!" Vronsky said, seeming to understand him with
difficulty.  "If you don't mind, let's walk on.  It's so stuffy
among the carriages.  A letter?  No, thank you; to meet death one
needs no letters of introduction.  Nor for the Turks..." he said,
with a smile that was merely of the lips.  His eyes still kept
their look of angry suffering.

"Yes; but you might find it easier to get into relations, which
are after all essential, with anyone prepared to see you.  But
that's as you like.  I was very glad to hear of your intention.
There have been so many attacks made on the volunteers, and a man
like you raises them in public estimation."

"My use as a man," said Vronsky, "is that life's worth nothing to
me.  And that I've enough bodily energy to cut my way into their
ranks, and to trample on them or fall--I know that.  I'm glad
there's something to give my life for, for it's not simply
useless but loathsome to me.  Anyone's welcome to it."  And his
jaw twitched impatiently from the incessant gnawing toothache,
that prevented him from even speaking with a natural expression.

"You will become another man, I predict," said Sergey
Ivanovitch, feeling touched.  "To deliver one's brother-men from
bondage is an aim worth death and life.  God grant you success
outwardly--and inwardly peace," he added, and he held out his
hand.  Vronsky warmly pressed his outstretched hand.

"Yes, as a weapon I may be of some use.  But as a man, I'm a
wreck," he jerked out.

He could hardly speak for the throbbing ache in his strong teeth,
that were like rows of ivory in his mouth.  He was silent, and
his eyes rested on the wheels of the tender, slowly and smoothly
rolling along the rails.

And all at once a different pain, not an ache, but an inner
trouble, that set his whole being in anguish, made him for an
instant forget his toothache.  As he glanced at the tender and
the rails, under the influence of the conversation with a friend
he had not met since his misfortune, he suddenly recalled
_her_--that is, what was left of her when he had run like one
distraught into the cloak room of the railway station--on the
table, shamelessly sprawling out among strangers, the
bloodstained body so lately full of life; the head unhurt
dropping back with its weight of hair, and the curling tresses
about the temples, and the exquisite face, with red, half-opened
mouth, the strange, fixed expression, piteous on the lips and
awful in the still open eyes, that seemed to utter that fearful
phrase--that he would be sorry for it--that she had said when
they were quarreling.

And he tried to think of her as she was when he met her the first
time, at a railway station too, mysterious, exquisite, loving,
seeking and giving happiness, and not cruelly revengeful as he
remembered her on that last moment.  He tried to recall his best
moments with her, but those moments were poisoned forever.  He
could only think of her as triumphant, successful in her menace
of a wholly useless remorse never to be effaced.  He lost all
consciousness of toothache, and his face worked with sobs.

Passing twice up and down beside the baggage in silence and
regaining his self-possession, he addressed Sergey Ivanovitch
calmly:

"You have had no telegrams since yesterday's?  Yes, driven back
for a third time, but a decisive engagement expected for
tomorrow."

And after talking a little more of King Milan's proclamation, and
the immense effect it might have, they parted, going to their
carriages on hearing the second bell.



Chapter 6


Sergey Ivanovitch had not telegraphed to his brother to send to
meet him, as he did not know when he should be able to leave
Moscow.  Levin was not at home when Katavasov and Sergey
Ivanovitch in a fly hired at the station drove up to the steps of
the Pokrovskoe house, as black as Moors from the dust of the
road.  Kitty, sitting on the balcony with her father and sister,
recognized her brother-in-law, and ran down to meet him.

"What a shame not to have let us know," she said, giving her hand
to Sergey Ivanovitch, and putting her forehead up for him to
kiss.

"We drove here capitally, and have not put you out," answered
Sergey Ivanovitch.  "I'm so dirty.  I'm afraid to touch you.
I've been so busy, I didn't know when I should be able to tear
myself away.  And so you're still as ever enjoying your peaceful,
quiet happiness," he said, smiling, "out of the reach of the
current in your peaceful backwater.  Here's our friend Fyodor
Vassilievitch who has succeeded in getting here at last."

"But I'm not a negro, I shall look like a human being when I
wash," said Katavasov in his jesting fashion, and he shook hands
and smiled, his teeth flashing white in his black face.

"Kostya will be delighted.  He has gone to his settlement.  It's
time he should be home."

"Busy as ever with his farming.  It really is a peaceful
backwater," said Katavasov; "while we in town think of nothing
but the Servian war.  Well, how does our friend look at it?  He's
sure not to think like other people."

"Oh, I don't know, like everybody else," Kitty answered, a little
embarrassed, looking round at Sergey Ivanovitch.  "I'll send to
fetch him.  Papa's staying with us.  He's only just come home
from abroad."

And making arrangements to send for Levin and for the guests to
wash, one in his room and the other in what had been Dolly's, and
giving orders for their luncheon, Kitty ran out onto the balcony,
enjoying the freedom, and rapidity of movement, of which she had
been deprived during the months of her pregnancy.

"It's Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov, a professor," she said.

"Oh, that's a bore in this heat," said the prince.

"No, papa, he's very nice, and Kostya's very fond of him," Kitty
said, with a deprecating smile, noticing the irony on her
father's face.

"Oh, I didn't say anything."

"You go to them, darling," said Kitty to her sister, "and
entertain them.  They saw Stiva at the station; he was quite
well.  And I must run to Mitya.  As ill-luck would have it, I
haven't fed him since tea.  He's awake now, and sure to be
screaming."  And feeling a rush of milk, she hurried to the
nursery.

This was not a mere guess; her connection with the child was
still so close, that she could gauge by the flow of her milk his
need of food, and knew for certain he was hungry.

She knew he was crying before she reached the nursery.  And he
was indeed crying.  She heard him and hastened.  But the faster
she went, the louder he screamed.  It was a fine healthy scream,
hungry and impatient.

"Has he been screaming long, nurse, very long?" said Kitty
hurriedly, seating herself on a chair, and preparing to give the
baby the breast.  "But give me him quickly.  Oh, nurse, how
tiresome you are!  There, tie the cap afterwards, do!"

The baby's greedy scream was passing into sobs.

"But you can't manage so, ma'am," said Agafea Mihalovna, who was
almost always to be found in the nursery.  "He must be put
straight.  A-oo! a-oo!" she chanted over him, paying no attention
to the mother.

The nurse brought the baby to his mother.  Agafea Mihalovna
followed him with a face dissolving with tenderness.

"He knows me, he knows me.  In God's faith, Katerina
Alexandrovna, ma'am, he knew me!" Agafea Mihalovna cried above
the baby's screams.

But Kitty did not hear her words.  Her impatience kept growing,
like the baby's.

Their impatience hindered things for a while.  The baby could not
get hold of the breast right, and was furious.

At last, after despairing, breathless screaming, and vain
sucking, things went right, and mother and child felt
simultaneously soothed, and both subsided into calm.

"But poor darling, he's all in perspiration!" said Kitty in a
whisper, touching the baby.

"What makes you think he knows you?" she added, with a sidelong
glance at the baby's eyes, that peered roguishly, as she fancied,
from under his cap, at his rhythmically puffing cheeks, and the
little red-palmed hand he was waving.

"Impossible!  If he knew anyone, he would have known me," said
Kitty, in response to Agafea Mihalovna's statement, and she
smiled.

She smiled because, though she said he could not know her, in her
heart she was sure that he knew not merely Agafea Mihalovna, but
that he knew and understood everything, and knew and understood a
great deal too that no one else knew, and that she, his mother,
had learned and come to understand only through him.  To Agafea
Mihalovna, to the nurse, to his grandfather, to his father even,
Mitya was a living being, requiring only material care, but for
his mother he had long been a mortal being, with whom there had
been a whole series of spiritual relations already.

"When he wakes up, please God, you shall see for yourself.  Then
when I do like this, he simply beams on me, the darling!  Simply
beams like a sunny day!" said Agafea Mihalovna.

"Well, well; then we shall see," whispered Kitty.  "But now go
away, he's going to sleep."



Chapter 7


Agafea Mihalovna went out on tiptoe; the nurse let down the
blind, chased a fly out from under the muslin canopy of the crib,
and a bumblebee struggling on the window-frame, and sat down
waving a faded branch of birch over the mother and the baby.

"How hot it is! if God would send a drop of rain," she said.

"Yes, yes, sh--sh--sh--" was all Kitty answered, rocking a
little, and tenderly squeezing the plump little arm, with rolls
of fat at the wrist, which Mitya still waved feebly as he opened
and shut his eyes.  That hand worried Kitty; she longed to kiss
the little hand, but was afraid to for fear of waking the baby.
At last the little hand ceased waving, and the eyes closed.  Only
from time to time, as he went on sucking, the baby raised his
long, curly eyelashes and peeped at his mother with wet eyes,
that looked black in the twilight.  The nurse had left off
fanning, and was dozing.  From above came the peals of the old
prince's voice, and the chuckle of Katavasov.

"They have got into talk without me," thought Kitty, "but still
it's vexing that Kostya's out.  He's sure to have gone to the
bee house again.  Though it's a pity he's there so often, still
I'm glad.  It distracts his mind.  He's become altogether happier
and better now than in the spring.  He used to be so gloomy and
worried that I felt frightened for him.  And how absurd he is!"
she whispered, smiling.

She knew what worried her husband.  It was his unbelief.
Although, if she had been asked whether she supposed that in the
future life, if he did not believe, he would be damned, she would
have had to admit that he would be damned, his unbelief did not
cause her unhappiness.  And she, confessing that for an
unbeliever there can be no salvation, and loving her husband's
soul more than anything in the world, thought with a smile of his
unbelief, and told herself that he was absurd.

"What does he keep reading philosophy of some sort for all this
year?" she wondered.  "If it's all written in those books, he can
understand them.  If it's all wrong, why does he read them?  He
says himself that he would like to believe.  Then why is it he
doesn't believe?  Surely from his thinking so much?  And he
thinks so much from being solitary.  He's always alone, alone.
He can't talk about it all to us.  I fancy he'll be glad of these
visitors, especially Katavasov.  He likes discussions with them,"
she thought, and passed instantly to the consideration of where
it would be more convenient to put Katavasov, to sleep alone or
to share Sergey Ivanovitch's room.  And then an idea suddenly
struck her, which made her shudder and even disturb Mitya, who
glanced severely at her.  "I do believe the laundress hasn't sent
the washing yet, and all the best sheets are in use.  If I don't
see to it, Agafea Mihalovna will give Sergey Ivanovitch the wrong
sheets," and at the very idea of this the blood rushed to Kitty's
face.

"Yes, I will arrange it," she decided, and going back to her
former thoughts, she remembered that some spiritual question of
importance had been interrupted, and she began to recall what.
"Yes, Kostya, an unbeliever," she thought again with a smile.

"Well, an unbeliever then!  Better let him always be one than
like Madame Stahl, or what I tried to be in those days abroad.
No, he won't ever sham anything."

And a recent instance of his goodness rose vividly to her mind.
A fortnight ago a penitent letter had come from Stepan
Arkadyevitch to Dolly.  He besought her to save his honor, to
sell her estate to pay his debts.  Dolly was in despair, she
detested her husband, despised him, pitied him, resolved on a
separation, resolved to refuse, but ended by agreeing to sell
part of her property.  After that, with an irrepressible smile of
tenderness, Kitty recalled her husband's shamefaced
embarrassment, his repeated awkward efforts to approach the
subject, and how at last, having thought of the one means of
helping Dolly without wounding her pride, he had suggested to
Kitty--what had not occurred to her before--that she should give
up her share of the property.

"He an unbeliever indeed!  With his heart, his dread of offending
anyone, even a child!  Everything for others, nothing for
himself.  Sergey Ivanovitch simply considers it as Kostya's duty
to be his steward.  And it's the same with his sister.  Now Dolly
and her children are under his guardianship; all these peasants
who come to him every day, as though he were bound to be at their
service."

"Yes, only be like your father, only like him," she said, handing
Mitya over to the nurse, and putting her lips to his cheek.



Chapter 8


Ever since, by his beloved brother's deathbed, Levin had first
glanced into the questions of life and death in the light of
these new convictions, as he called them, which had during the
period from his twentieth to his thirty-fourth year imperceptibly
replaced his childish and youthful beliefs--he had been stricken
with horror, not so much of death, as of life, without any
knowledge of whence, and why, and how, and what it was.  The
physical organization, its decay, the indestructibility of
matter, the law of the conservation of energy, evolution, were
the words which usurped the place of his old belief.  These words
and the ideas associated with them were very well for
intellectual purposes.  But for life they yielded nothing, and
Levin felt suddenly like a man who has changed his warm fur cloak
for a muslin garment, and going for the first time into the frost
is immediately convinced, not by reason, but by his whole nature
that he is as good as naked, and that he must infallibly perish
miserably.

From that moment, though he did not distinctly face it, and still
went on living as before, Levin had never lost this sense of
terror at his lack of knowledge.

He vaguely felt, too, that what he called his new convictions
were not merely lack of knowledge, but that they were part of a
whole order of ideas, in which no knowledge of what he needed was
possible.

At first, marriage, with the new joys and duties bound up with
it, had completely crowded out these thoughts.  But of late,
while he was staying in Moscow after his wife's confinement, with
nothing to do, the question that clamored for solution had more
and more often, more and more insistently, haunted Levin's mind.

The question was summed up for him thus: "If I do not accept the
answers Christianity gives to the problems of my life, what
answers do I accept?"  And in the whole arsenal of his
convictions, so far from finding any satisfactory answers, he was
utterly unable to find anything at all like an answer.

He was in the position of a man seeking food in toy shops and
tool shops.

Instinctively, unconsciously, with every book, with every
conversation, with every man he met, he was on the lookout for
light on these questions and their solution.

What puzzled and distracted him above everything was that the
majority of men of his age and circle had, like him, exchanged
their old beliefs for the same new convictions, and yet saw
nothing to lament in this, and were perfectly satisfied and
serene.  So that, apart from the principal question, Levin was
tortured by other questions too.  Were these people sincere? he
asked himself, or were they playing a part? or was it that they
understood the answers science gave to these problems in some
different, clearer sense than he did?  And he assiduously studied
both these men's opinions and the books which treated of these
scientific explanations.

One fact he had found out since these questions had engrossed his
mind, was that he had been quite wrong in supposing from the
recollections of the circle of his young days at college, that
religion had outlived its day, and that it was now practically
non-existent.  All the people nearest to him who were good in
their lives were believers.  The old prince, and Lvov, whom he
liked so much, and Sergey Ivanovitch, and all the women believed,
and his wife believed as simply as he had believed in his
earliest childhood, and ninety-nine hundredths of the Russian
people, all the working people for whose life he felt the deepest
respect, believed.

Another fact of which he became convinced, after reading many
scientific books, was that the men who shared his views had no
other construction to put on them, and that they gave no
explanation of the questions which he felt he could not live
without answering, but simply ignored their existence and
attempted to explain other questions of no possible interest to
him, such as the evolution of organisms, the materialistic theory
of consciousness, and so forth.

Moreover, during his wife's confinement, something had happened
that seemed extraordinary to him.  He, an unbeliever, had fallen
into praying, and at the moment he prayed, he believed.  But that
moment had passed, and he could not make his state of mind at
that moment fit into the rest of his life.

He could not admit that at that moment he knew the truth, and
that now he was wrong; for as soon as he began thinking calmly
about it, it all fell to pieces.  He could not admit that he was
mistaken then, for his spiritual condition then was precious to
him, and to admit that it was a proof of weakness would have been
to desecrate those moments.  He was miserably divided against
himself, and strained all his spiritual forces to the utmost to
escape from this condition.



Chapter 9


These doubts fretted and harassed him, growing weaker or stronger
from time to time, but never leaving him.  He read and thought,
and the more he read and the more he thought, the further he felt
from the aim he was pursuing.

Of late in Moscow and in the country, since he had become
convinced that he would find no solution in the materialists, he
had read and re-read thoroughly Plato, Spinoza, Kant, Schelling,
Hegel, and Schopenhauer, the philosophers who gave a
non-materialistic explanation of life.

Their ideas seemed to him fruitful when he was reading or was
himself seeking arguments to refute other theories, especially
those of the materialists; but as soon as he began to read or
sought for himself a solution of problems, the same thing always
happened.  As long as he followed the fixed definition of obscure
words such as _spirit, will, freedom, essence,_ purposely letting
himself go into the snare of words the philosophers set for him,
he seemed to comprehend something.  But he had only to forget the
artificial train of reasoning, and to turn from life itself to
what had satisfied him while thinking in accordance with the
fixed definitions, and all this artificial edifice fell to pieces
at once like a house of cards, and it became clear that the
edifice had been built up out of those transposed words, apart
from anything in life more important than reason.

At one time, reading Schopenhauer, he put in place of his will
the word _love_, and for a couple of days this new philosophy
charmed him, till he removed a little away from it.  But then,
when he turned from life itself to glance at it again, it fell
away too, and proved to be the same muslin garment with no warmth
in it.

His brother Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to read the theological
works of Homiakov.  Levin read the second volume of Homiakov's
works, and in spite of the elegant, epigrammatic, argumentative
style which at first repelled him, he was impressed by the
doctrine of the church he found in them.  He was struck at first
by the idea that the apprehension of divine truths had not been
vouchsafed to man, but to a corporation of men bound together by
love--to the church.  What delighted him was the thought how much
easier it was to believe in a still existing living church,
embracing all the beliefs of men, and having God at its head, and
therefore holy and infallible, and from it to accept the faith in
God, in the creation, the fall, the redemption, than to begin
with God, a mysterious, far-away God, the creation, etc.  But
afterwards, on reading a Catholic writer's history of the church,
and then a Greek orthodox writer's history of the church, and
seeing that the two churches, in their very conception
infallible, each deny the authority of the other, Homiakov's
doctrine of the church lost all its charm for him, and this
edifice crumbled into dust like the philosophers' edifices.

All that spring he was not himself, and went through fearful
moments of horror.

"Without knowing what I am and why I am here, life's impossible;
and that I can't know, and so I can't live," Levin said to
himself.

"In infinite time, in infinite matter, in infinite space, is
formed a bubble-organism, and that bubble lasts a while and
bursts, and that bubble is Me."

It was an agonizing error, but it was the sole logical result of
ages of human thought in that direction.

This was the ultimate belief on which all the systems elaborated
by human thought in almost all their ramifications rested.  It
was the prevalent conviction, and of all other explanations Levin
had unconsciously, not knowing when or how, chosen it, as anyway
the clearest, and made it his own.

But it was not merely a falsehood, it was the cruel jeer of some
wicked power, some evil, hateful power, to whom one could not
submit.

He must escape from this power.  And the means of escape every
man had in his own hands.  He had but to cut short this
dependence on evil.  And there was one means--death.

And Levin, a happy father and husband, in perfect health, was
several times so near suicide that he hid the cord that he might
not be tempted to hang himself, and was afraid to go out with his
gun for fear of shooting himself.

But Levin did not shoot himself, and did not hang himself; he
went on living.



Chapter 10


When Levin thought what he was and what he was living for, he
could find no answer to the questions and was reduced to despair,
but he left off questioning himself about it.  It seemed as
though he knew both what he was and for what he was living, for
he acted and lived resolutely and without hesitation.  Indeed, in
these latter days he was far more decided and unhesitating in
life than he had ever been.

When he went back to the country at the beginning of June, he
went back also to his usual pursuits.  The management of the
estate, his relations with the peasants and the neighbors, the
care of his household, the management of his sister's and
brother's property, of which he had the direction, his relations
with his wife and kindred, the care of his child, and the new
bee-keeping hobby he had taken up that spring, filled all his
time.

These things occupied him now, not because he justified them to
himself by any sort of general principles, as he had done in
former days; on the contrary, disappointed by the failure of his
former efforts for the general welfare, and too much occupied
with his own thought and the mass of business with which he was
burdened from all sides, he had completely given up thinking of
the general good, and he busied himself with all this work simply
because it seemed to him that he must do what he was doing--that
he could not do otherwise.  In former days--almost from
childhood, and increasingly up to full manhood--when he had tried
to do anything that would be good for all, for humanity, for
Russia, for the whole village, he had noticed that the idea of it
had been pleasant, but the work itself had always been
incoherent, that then he had never had a full conviction of its
absolute necessity, and that the work that had begun by seeming
so great, had grown less and less, till it vanished into nothing.
But now, since his marriage, when he had begun to confine himself
more and more to living for himself, though he experienced no
delight at all at the thought of the work he was doing, he felt a
complete conviction of its necessity, saw that it succeeded far
better than in old days, and that it kept on growing more and
more.

Now, involuntarily it seemed, he cut more and more deeply into
the soil like a plough, so that he could not be drawn out without
turning aside the furrow.

To live the same family life as his father and forefathers--that
is, in the same condition of culture--and to bring up his
children in the same, was incontestably necessary.  It was as
necessary as dining when one was hungry.  And to do this, just as
it was necessary to cook dinner, it was necessary to keep the
mechanism of agriculture at Pokrovskoe going so as to yield an
income.  Just as incontestably as it was necessary to repay a
debt was it necessary to keep the property in such a condition
that his son, when he received it as a heritage, would say "thank
you" to his father as Levin had said "thank you" to his
grandfather for all he built and planted.  And to do this it was
necessary to look after the land himself, not to let it, and to
breed cattle, manure the fields, and plant timber.

It was impossible not to look after the affairs of Sergey
Ivanovitch, of his sister, of the peasants who came to him for
advice and were accustomed to do so--as impossible as to fling
down a child one is carrying in one's arms.  It was necessary to
look after the comfort of his sister-in-law and her children, and
of his wife and baby, and it was impossible not to spend with
them at least a short time each day.

And all this, together with shooting and his new bee-keeping,
filled up the whole of Levin's life, which had no meaning at all
for him, when he began to think.

But besides knowing thoroughly what he had to do, Levin knew in
just the same way _how_ he had to do it all, and what was more
important than the rest.

He knew he must hire laborers as cheaply as possible; but to hire
men under bond, paying them in advance at less than the current
rate of wages, was what he must not do, even though it was very
profitable.  Selling straw to the peasants in times of scarcity
of provender was what he might do, even though he felt sorry for
them; but the tavern and the pothouse must be put down, though
they were a source of income.  Felling timber must be punished as
severely as possible, but he could not exact forfeits for cattle
being driven onto his fields; and though it annoyed the keeper
and made the peasants not afraid to graze their cattle on his
land, he could not keep their cattle as a punishment.

To Pyotr, who was paying a money-lender 10 per cent. a month, he
must lend a sum of money to set him free.  But he could not let
off peasants who did not pay their rent, nor let them fall into
arrears.  It was impossible to overlook the bailiff's not having
mown the meadows and letting the hay spoil; and it was equally
impossible to mow those acres where a young copse had been
planted.  It was impossible to excuse a laborer who had gone home
in the busy season because his father was dying, however sorry he
might feel for him, and he must subtract from his pay those
costly months of idleness.  But it was impossible not to allow
monthly rations to the old servants who were of no use for
anything.

Levin knew that when he got home he must first of all go to his
wife, who was unwell, and that the peasants who had been waiting
for three hours to see him could wait a little longer.  He knew
too that, regardless of all the pleasure he felt in taking a
swarm, he must forego that pleasure, and leave the old man to see
to the bees alone, while he talked to the peasants who had come
after him to the bee-house.

Whether he were acting rightly or wrongly he did not know, and
far from trying to prove that he was, nowadays he avoided all
thought or talk about it.

Reasoning had brought him to doubt, and prevented him from seeing
what he ought to do and what he ought not.  When he did not
think, but simply lived, he was continually aware of the presence
of an infallible judge in his soul, determining which of two
possible courses of action was the better and which was the
worse, and as soon as he did not act rightly, he was at once
aware of it.

So he lived, not knowing and not seeing any chance of knowing
what he was and what he was living for, and harassed at this lack
of knowledge to such a point that he was afraid of suicide, and
yet firmly laying down his own individual definite path in life.



Chapter 11


The day on which Sergey Ivanovitch came to Pokrovskoe was one of
Levin's most painful days.  It was the very busiest working time,
when all the peasantry show an extraordinary intensity of
self-sacrifice in labor, such as is never shown in any other
conditions of life, and would be highly esteemed if the men who
showed these qualities themselves thought highly of them, and if
it were not repeated every year, and if the results of this
intense labor were not so simple.

To reap and bind the rye and oats and to carry it, to mow the
meadows, turn over the fallows, thrash the seed and sow the
winter corn--all this seems so simple and ordinary; but to
succeed in getting through it all everyone in the village, from
the old man to the young child, must toil incessantly for three
or four weeks, three times as hard as usual, living on rye-beer,
onions, and black bread, thrashing and carrying the sheaves at
night, and not giving more than two or three hours in the
twenty-four to sleep.  And every year this is done all over
Russia.

Having lived the greater part of his life in the country and in
the closest relations with the peasants, Levin always felt in
this busy time that he was infected by this general quickening of
energy in the people.

In the early morning he rode over to the first sowing of the rye,
and to the oats, which were being carried to the stacks, and
returning home at the time his wife and sister-in-law were
getting up, he drank coffee with them and walked to the farm,
where a new thrashing machine was to be set working to get ready
the seed-corn.

He was standing in the cool granary, still fragrant with the
leaves of the hazel branches interlaced on the freshly peeled
aspen beams of the new thatch roof.  He gazed through the open
door in which the dry bitter dust of the thrashing whirled and
played, at the grass of the thrashing floor in the sunlight and
the fresh straw that had been brought in from the barn, then at
the speckly-headed, white-breasted swallows that flew chirping in
under the roof and, fluttering their wings, settled in the
crevices of the doorway, then at the peasants bustling in the
dark, dusty barn, and he thought strange thoughts.

"Why is it all being done?" he thought.  "Why am I standing here,
making them work?  What are they all so busy for, trying to show
their zeal before me?  What is that old Matrona, my old friend,
toiling for?  (I doctored her, when the beam fell on her in the
fire)" he thought, looking at a thin old woman who was raking up
the grain, moving painfully with her bare, sun-blackened feet
over the uneven, rough floor.  "Then she recovered, but today or
tomorrow or in ten years she won't; they'll bury her, and
nothing will be left either of her or of that smart girl in the
red jacket, who with that skillful, soft action shakes the ears
out of their husks.  They'll bury her and this piebald horse, and
very soon too," he thought, gazing at the heavily moving, panting
horse that kept walking up the wheel that turned under him.  "And
they will bury her and Fyodor the thrasher with his curly beard
full of chaff and his shirt torn on his white shoulders--they
will bury him.  He's untying the sheaves, and giving orders, and
shouting to the women, and quickly setting straight the strap on
the moving wheel.  And what's more, it's not them alone--me
they'll bury too, and nothing will be left.  What for?"

He thought this, and at the same time looked at his watch to
reckon how much they thrashed in an hour.  He wanted to know this
so as to judge by it the task to set for the day.

"It'll soon be one, and they're only beginning the third sheaf,"
thought Levin.  He went up to the man that was feeding the
machine, and shouting over the roar of the machine he told him to
put it in more slowly.  "You put in too much at a time, Fyodor.
Do you see--it gets choked, that's why it isn't getting on.  Do
it evenly."

Fyodor, black with the dust that clung to his moist face, shouted
something in response, but still went on doing it as Levin did
not want him to.

Levin, going up to the machine, moved Fyodor aside, and began
feeding the corn in himself.  Working on till the peasants'
dinner hour, which was not long in coming, he went out of the
barn with Fyodor and fell into talk with him, stopping beside a
neat yellow sheaf of rye laid on the thrashing floor for seed.

Fyodor came from a village at some distance from the one in which
Levin had once allotted land to his cooperative association.  Now
it had been let to a former house porter.

Levin talked to Fyodor about this land and asked whether Platon,
a well-to-do peasant of good character belonging to the same
village, would not take the land for the coming year.

"It's a high rent; it wouldn't pay Platon, Konstantin
Dmitrievitch," answered the peasant, picking the ears off his
sweat-drenched shirt.

"But how does Kirillov make it pay?"

"Mituh!" (so the peasant called the house porter, in a tone of
contempt), "you may be sure he'll make it pay, Konstantin
Dmitrievitch!  He'll get his share, however he has to squeeze to
get it!  He's no mercy on a Christian.  But Uncle Fokanitch" (so
he called the old peasant Platon), "do you suppose he'd flay the
skin off a man?  Where there's debt, he'll let anyone off.  And
he'll not wring the last penny out.  He's a man too."

"But why will he let anyone off?"

"Oh, well, of course, folks are different.  One man lives for his
own wants and nothing else, like Mituh, he only thinks of filling
his belly, but Fokanitch is a righteous man.  He lives for his
soul.  He does not forget God."

"How thinks of God?  How does he live for his soul?" Levin almost
shouted.

"Why, to be sure, in truth, in God's way.  Folks are different.
Take you now, you wouldn't wrong a man...."

"Yes, yes, good-bye!" said Levin, breathless with excitement, and
turning round he took his stick and walked quickly away towards
home.  At the peasant's words that Fokanitch lived for his soul,
in truth, in God's way, undefined but significant ideas seemed to
burst out as though they had been locked up, and all striving
towards one goal, they thronged whirling through his head,
blinding him with their light.



Chapter 12


Levin strode along the highroad, absorbed not so much in his
thoughts (he could not yet disentangle them) as in his spiritual
condition, unlike anything he had experienced before.

The words uttered by the peasant had acted on his soul like an
electric shock, suddenly transforming and combining into a single
whole the whole swarm of disjointed, impotent, separate thoughts
that incessantly occupied his mind.  These thoughts had
unconsciously been in his mind even when he was talking about the
land.

He was aware of something new in his soul, and joyfully tested
this new thing, not yet knowing what it was.

"Not living for his own wants, but for God?  For what God?  And
could one say anything more senseless than what he said?  He said
that one must not live for one's own wants, that is, that one
must not live for what we understand, what we are attracted by,
what we desire, but must live for something incomprehensible, for
God, whom no one can understand nor even define.  What of it?
Didn't I understand those senseless words of Fyodor's?  And
understanding them, did I doubt of their truth?  Did I think them
stupid, obscure, inexact?  No, I understood him, and exactly as
he understands the words.  I understood them more fully and
clearly than I understand anything in life, and never in my life
have I doubted nor can I doubt about it.  And not only I, but
everyone, the whole world understands nothing fully but this, and
about this only they have no doubt and are always agreed.

"And I looked out for miracles, complained that I did not see a
miracle which would convince me.  A material miracle would have
persuaded me.  And here is a miracle, the sole miracle possible,
continually existing, surrounding me on all sides, and I never
noticed it!

"Fyodor says that Kirillov lives for his belly.  That's
comprehensible and rational.  All of us as rational beings can't
do anything else but live for our belly.  And all of a sudden the
same Fyodor says that one mustn't live for one's belly, but must
live for truth, for God, and at a hint I understand him!  And I
and millions of men, men who lived ages ago and men living now--
peasants, the poor in spirit and the learned, who have thought
and written about it, in their obscure words saying the same
thing--we are all agreed about this one thing: what we must live
for and what is good.  I and all men have only one firm,
incontestable, clear knowledge, and that knowledge cannot be
explained by the reason--it is outside it, and has no causes and
can have no effects.

"If goodness has causes, it is not goodness; if it has effects, a
reward, it is not goodness either.  So goodness is outside the
chain of cause and effect.

"And yet I know it, and we all know it.

"What could be a greater miracle than that?

"Can I have found the solution of it all? can my sufferings be
over?" thought Levin, striding along the dusty road, not noticing
the heat nor his weariness, and experiencing a sense of relief
from prolonged suffering.  This feeling was so delicious that it
seemed to him incredible.  He was breathless with emotion and
incapable of going farther; he turned off the road into the
forest and lay down in the shade of an aspen on the uncut grass.
He took his hat off his hot head and lay propped on his elbow in
the lush, feathery, woodland grass.

"Yes, I must make it clear to myself and understand," he thought,
looking intently at the untrampled grass before him, and
following the movements of a green beetle, advancing along a
blade of couch-grass and lifting up in its progress a leaf of
goat-weed.  "What have I discovered?" he asked himself, bending
aside the leaf of goat-weed out of the beetle's way and twisting
another blade of grass above for the beetle to cross over onto
it.  "What is it makes me glad?  What have I discovered?

"I have discovered nothing.  I have only found out what I knew.
I understand the force that in the past gave me life, and now too
gives me life.  I have been set free from falsity, I have found
the Master.

"Of old I used to say that in my body, that in the body of this
grass and of this beetle (there, she didn't care for the grass,
she's opened her wings and flown away), there was going on a
transformation of matter in accordance with physical, chemical,
and physiological laws.  And in all of us, as well as in the
aspens and the clouds and the misty patches, there was a process
of evolution.  Evolution from what? into what?--Eternal evolution
and struggle....  As though there could be any sort of tendency
and struggle in the eternal!  And I was astonished that in spite
of the utmost effort of thought along that road I could not
discover the meaning of life, the meaning of my impulses and
yearnings.  Now I say that I know the meaning of my life: 'To
live for God, for my soul.'  And this meaning, in spite of its
clearness, is mysterious and marvelous.  Such, indeed, is the
meaning of everything existing.  Yes, pride," he said to himself,
turning over on his stomach and beginning to tie a noose of
blades of grass, trying not to break them.

"And not merely pride of intellect, but dulness of intellect.
And most of all, the deceitfulness; yes, the deceitfulness of
intellect.  The cheating knavishness of intellect, that's it," he
said to himself.

And he briefly went through, mentally, the whole course of his
ideas during the last two years, the beginning of which was the
clear confronting of death at the sight of his dear brother
hopelessly ill.

Then, for the first time, grasping that for every man, and
himself too, there was nothing in store but suffering, death, and
forgetfulness, he had made up his mind that life was impossible
like that, and that he must either interpret life so that it
would not present itself to him as the evil jest of some devil,
or shoot himself.

But he had not done either, but had gone on living, thinking, and
feeling, and had even at that very time married, and had had many
joys and had been happy, when he was not thinking of the meaning
of his life.

What did this mean?  It meant that he had been living rightly,
but thinking wrongly.

He had lived (without being aware of it) on those spiritual
truths that he had sucked in with his mother's milk, but he had
thought, not merely without recognition of these truths, but
studiously ignoring them.

Now it was clear to him that he could only live by virtue of the
beliefs in which he had been brought up.

"What should I have been, and how should I have spent my life, if
I had not had these beliefs, if I had not known that I must live
for God and not for my own desires?  I should have robbed and
lied and killed.  Nothing of what makes the chief happiness of my
life would have existed for me."  And with the utmost stretch of
imagination he could not conceive the brutal creature he would
have been himself, if he had not known what he was living for.

"I looked for an answer to my question.  And thought could not
give an answer to my question--it is incommensurable with my
question.  The answer has been given me by life itself, in my
knowledge of what is right and what is wrong.  And that knowledge
I did not arrive at in any way, it was given to me as to all
men, _given_, because I could not have got it from anywhere.

"Where could I have got it?  By reason could I have arrived at
knowing that I must love my neighbor and not oppress him?  I was
told that in my childhood, and I believed it gladly, for they
told me what was already in my soul.  But who discovered it?  Not
reason.  Reason discovered the struggle for existence, and the
law that requires us to oppress all who hinder the satisfaction
of our desires.  That is the deduction of reason.  But loving
one's neighbor reason could never discover, because it's
irrational."



Chapter 13


And Levin remembered a scene he had lately witnessed between
Dolly and her children.  The children, left to themselves, had
begun cooking raspberries over the candles and squirting milk
into each other's mouths with a syringe.  Their mother, catching
them at these pranks, began reminding them in Levin's presence of
the trouble their mischief gave to the grown-up people, and that
this trouble was all for their sake, and that if they smashed the
cups they would have nothing to drink their tea out of, and that
if they wasted the milk, they would have nothing to eat, and die
of hunger.

And Levin had been struck by the passive, weary incredulity with
which the children heard what their mother said to them.  They
were simply annoyed that their amusing play had been interrupted,
and did not believe a word of what their mother was saying.  They
could not believe it indeed, for they could not take in the
immensity of all they habitually enjoyed, and so could not
conceive that what they were destroying was the very thing they
lived by.

"That all comes of itself," they thought, "and there's nothing
interesting or important about it because it has always been so,
and always will be so.  And it's all always the same.  We've no
need to think about that, it's all ready.  But we want to invent
something of our own, and new.  So we thought of putting
raspberries in a cup, and cooking them over a candle, and
squirting milk straight into each other's mouths.  That's fun,
and something new, and not a bit worse than drinking out of
cups."

"Isn't it just the same that we do, that I did, searching by the
aid of reason for the significance of the forces of nature and
the meaning of the life of man?" he thought.

"And don't all the theories of philosophy do the same, trying by
the path of thought, which is strange and not natural to man, to
bring him to a knowledge of what he has known long ago, and knows
so certainly that he could not live at all without it?  Isn't it
distinctly to be seen in the development of each philosopher's
theory, that he knows what is the chief significance of life
beforehand, just as positively as the peasant Fyodor, and not a
bit more clearly than he, and is simply trying by a dubious
intellectual path to come back to what everyone knows?

"Now then, leave the children to themselves to get things alone
and make their crockery, get the milk from the cows, and so on.
Would they be naughty then?  Why, they'd die of hunger!  Well,
then, leave us with our passions and thoughts, without any idea
of the one God, of the Creator, or without any idea of what is
right, without any idea of moral evil.

"Just try and build up anything without those ideas!

"We only try to destroy them, because we're spiritually provided
for.  Exactly like the children!

"Whence have I that joyful knowledge, shared with the peasant,
that alone gives peace to my soul?  Whence did I get it?

"Brought up with an idea of God, a Christian, my whole life
filled with the spiritual blessings Christianity has given me,
full of them, and living on those blessings, like the children I
did not understand them, and destroy, that is try to destroy,
what I live by.  And as soon as an important moment of life
comes, like the children when they are cold and hungry, I turn to
Him, and even less than the children when their mother scolds
them for their childish mischief, do I feel that my childish
efforts at wanton madness are reckoned against me.

"Yes, what I know, I know not by reason, but it has been given to
me, revealed to me, and I know it with my heart, by faith in the
chief thing taught by the church.

"The church! the church!" Levin repeated to himself.  He turned
over on the other side, and leaning on his elbow, fell to gazing
into the distance at a herd of cattle crossing over to the river.

"But can I believe in all the church teaches?" he thought, trying
himself, and thinking of everything that could destroy his
present peace of mind.  Intentionally he recalled all those
doctrines of the church which had always seemed most strange and
had always been a stumbling block to him.

"The Creation?  But how did I explain existence?  By existence?
By nothing?  The devil and sin.  But how do I explain evil?...
The atonement?...

"But I know nothing, nothing, and I can know nothing but what has
been told to me and all men."

And it seemed to him that there was not a single article of faith
of the church which could destroy the chief thing--faith in God,
in goodness, as the one goal of man's destiny.

Under every article of faith of the church could be put the faith
in the service of truth instead of one's desires.  And each
doctrine did not simply leave that faith unshaken, each doctrine
seemed essential to complete that great miracle, continually
manifest upon earth, that made it possible for each man and
millions of different sorts of men, wise men and imbeciles, old
men and children--all men, peasants, Lvov, Kitty, beggars and
kings to understand perfectly the same one thing, and to build up
thereby that life of the soul which alone is worth living, and
which alone is precious to us.

Lying on his back, he gazed up now into the high, cloudless sky.
"Do I not know that that is infinite space, and that it is not a
round arch?  But, however I screw up my eyes and strain my sight,
I cannot see it not round and not bounded, and in spite of my
knowing about infinite space, I am incontestably right when I see
a solid blue dome, and more right than when I strain my eyes to
see beyond it."

Levin ceased thinking, and only, as it were, listened to
mysterious voices that seemed talking joyfully and earnestly
within him.

"Can this be faith?" he thought, afraid to believe in his
happiness.  "My God, I thank Thee!" he said, gulping down his
sobs, and with both hands brushing away the tears that filled his
eyes.



Chapter 14


Levin looked before him and saw a herd of cattle, then he caught
sight of his trap with Raven in the shafts, and the coachman,
who, driving up to the herd, said something to the herdsman.
Then he heard the rattle of the wheels and the snort of the sleek
horse close by him.  But he was so buried in his thoughts that he
did not even wonder why the coachman had come for him.

He only thought of that when the coachman had driven quite up to
him and shouted to him.  "The mistress sent me.  Your brother has
come, and some gentleman with him."

Levin got into the trap and took the reins.  As though just
roused out of sleep, for a long while Levin could not collect his
faculties.  He stared at the sleek horse flecked with lather
between his haunches and on his neck, where the harness rubbed,
stared at Ivan the coachman sitting beside him, and remembered
that he was expecting his brother, thought that his wife was most
likely uneasy at his long absence, and tried to guess who was the
visitor who had come with his brother.  And his brother and his
wife and the unknown guest seemed to him now quite different from
before.  He fancied that now his relations with all men would be
different.

"With my brother there will be none of that aloofness there
always used to be between us, there will be no disputes; with
Kitty there shall never be quarrels; with the visitor, whoever he
may be, I will be friendly and nice; with the servants, with
Ivan, it will all be different."

Pulling the stiff rein and holding in the good horse that snorted
with impatience and seemed begging to be let go, Levin looked
round at Ivan sitting beside him, not knowing what to do with his
unoccupied hand, continually pressing down his shirt as it puffed
out, and he tried to find something to start a conversation about
with him.  He would have said that Ivan had pulled the
saddle-girth up too high, but that was like blame, and he longed
for friendly, warm talk.  Nothing else occurred to him.

"Your honor must keep to the right and mind that stump," said the
coachman, pulling the rein Levin held.

"Please don't touch and don't teach me!" said Levin, angered by
this interference.  Now, as always, interference made him angry,
and he felt sorrowfully at once how mistaken had been his
supposition that his spiritual condition could immediately change
him in contact with reality.

He was not a quarter of a mile from home when he saw Grisha and
Tanya running to meet him.

"Uncle Kostya! mamma's coming, and grandfather, and Sergey
Ivanovitch, and someone else," they said, clambering up into the
trap.

"Who is he?"

"An awfully terrible person!  And he does like this with his
arms," said Tanya, getting up in the trap and mimicking
Katavasov.

"Old or young?" asked Levin, laughing, reminded of someone, he
did not know whom, by Tanya's performance.

"Oh, I hope it's not a tiresome person!" thought Levin.

As soon as he turned, at a bend in the road, and saw the party
coming, Levin recognized Katavasov in a straw hat, walking along
swinging his arms just as Tanya had shown him.  Katavasov was
very fond of discussing metaphysics, having derived his notions
from natural science writers who had never studied metaphysics,
and in Moscow Levin had had many arguments with him of late.

And one of these arguments, in which Katavasov had obviously
considered that he came off victorious, was the first thing Levin
thought of as he recognized him.

"No, whatever I do, I won't argue and give utterance to my ideas
lightly," he thought.

Getting out of the trap and greeting his brother and Katavasov,
Levin asked about his wife.

"She has taken Mitya to Kolok" (a copse near the house).  "She
meant to have him out there because it's so hot indoors," said
Dolly.  Levin had always advised his wife not to take the baby to
the wood, thinking it unsafe, and he was not pleased to hear
this.

"She rushes about from place to place with him," said the prince,
smiling.  "I advised her to try putting him in the ice cellar."

"She meant to come to the bee house.  She thought you would be
there.  We are going there," said Dolly.

"Well, and what are you doing?" said Sergey Ivanovitch, falling
back from the rest and walking beside him.

"Oh, nothing special.  Busy as usual with the land," answered
Levin.  "Well, and what about you?  Come for long?  We have been
expecting you for such a long time."

"Only for a fortnight.  I've a great deal to do in Moscow."

At these words the brothers' eyes met, and Levin, in spite of the
desire he always had, stronger than ever just now, to be on
affectionate and still more open terms with his brother, felt an
awkwardness in looking at him.  He dropped his eyes and did not
know what to say.

Casting over the subjects of conversation that would be pleasant
to Sergey Ivanovitch, and would keep him off the subject of the
Servian war and the Slavonic question, at which he had hinted by
the allusion to what he had to do in Moscow, Levin began to talk
of Sergey Ivanovitch's book.

"Well, have there been reviews of your book?" he asked.

Sergey Ivanovitch smiled at the intentional character of the
question.

"No one is interested in that now, and I less than anyone," he
said.  "Just look, Darya Alexandrovna, we shall have a shower,"
he added, pointing with a sunshade at the white rain clouds that
showed above the aspen tree-tops.

And these words were enough to re-establish again between the
brothers that tone--hardly hostile, but chilly--which Levin had
been so longing to avoid.

Levin went up to Katavasov.

"It was jolly of you to make up your mind to come," he said to
him.

"I've been meaning to a long while.  Now we shall have some
discussion, we'll see to that.  Have you been reading Spencer?"

"No, I've not finished reading him," said Levin.  "But I don't
need him now."

"How's that? that's interesting.  Why so?"

"I mean that I'm fully convinced that the solution of the
problems that interest me I shall never find in him and his like.
Now..."

But Katavasov's serene and good-humored expression suddenly
struck him, and he felt such tenderness for his own happy mood,
which he was unmistakably disturbing by this conversation, that
he remembered his resolution and stopped short.

"But we'll talk later on," he added.  "If we're going to the
bee house, it's this way, along this little path," he said,
addressing them all.

Going along the narrow path to a little uncut meadow covered on
one side with thick clumps of brilliant heart's-ease among which
stood up here and there tall, dark green tufts of hellebore,
Levin settled his guests in the dense, cool shade of the young
aspens on a bench and some stumps purposely put there for
visitors to the bee house who might be afraid of the bees, and he
went off himself to the hut to get bread, cucumbers, and fresh
honey, to regale them with.

Trying to make his movements as deliberate as possible, and
listening to the bees that buzzed more and more frequently past
him, he walked along the little path to the hut.  In the very
entry one bee hummed angrily, caught in his beard, but he
carefully extricated it.  Going into the shady outer room, he
took down from the wall his veil, that hung on a peg, and putting
it on, and thrusting his hands into his pockets, he went into the
fenced-in bee-garden, where there stood in the midst of a closely
mown space in regular rows, fastened with bast on posts, all the
hives he knew so well, the old stocks, each with its own history,
and along the fences the younger swarms hived that year.  In
front of the openings of the hives, it made his eyes giddy to
watch the bees and drones whirling round and round about the same
spot, while among them the working bees flew in and out with
spoils or in search of them, always in the same direction into
the wood to the flowering lime trees and back to the hives.

His ears were filled with the incessant hum in various notes, now
the busy hum of the working bee flying quickly off, then the
blaring of the lazy drone, and the excited buzz of the bees on
guard protecting their property from the enemy and preparing to
sting.  On the farther side of the fence the old bee-keeper was
shaving a hoop for a tub, and he did not see Levin.  Levin stood
still in the midst of the beehives and did not call him.

He was glad of a chance to be alone to recover from the influence
of ordinary actual life, which had already depressed his happy
mood.  He thought that he had already had time to lose his temper
with Ivan, to show coolness to his brother, and to talk
flippantly with Katavasov.

"Can it have been only a momentary mood, and will it pass and
leave no trace?" he thought.  But the same instant, going back to
his mood, he felt with delight that something new and important
had happened to him.  Real life had only for a time overcast the
spiritual peace he had found, but it was still untouched within
him.

Just as the bees, whirling round him, now menacing him and
distracting his attention, prevented him from enjoying complete
physical peace, forced him to restrain his movements to avoid
them, so had the petty cares that had swarmed about him from the
moment he got into the trap restricted his spiritual freedom; but
that lasted only so long as he was among them.  Just as his
bodily strength was still unaffected, in spite of the bees, so
too was the spiritual strength that he had just become aware of.



Chapter 15


"Do you know, Kostya, with whom Sergey Ivanovitch traveled on his
way here?" said Dolly, doling out cucumbers and honey to the
children; "with Vronsky!  He's going to Servia."

"And not alone; he's taking a squadron out with him at his own
expense," said Katavasov.

"That's the right thing for him," said Levin.  "Are volunteers
still going out then?" he added, glancing at Sergey Ivanovitch.

Sergey Ivanovitch did not answer.  He was carefully with a blunt
knife getting a live bee covered with sticky honey out of a cup
full of white honeycomb.

"I should think so! You should have seen what was going on at the
station yesterday!" said Katavasov, biting with a juicy sound
into a cucumber.

"Well, what is one to make of it?  For mercy's sake, do explain
to me, Sergey Ivanovitch, where are all those volunteers going,
whom are they fighting with?" asked the old prince, unmistakably
taking up a conversation that had sprung up in Levin's absence.

"With the Turks," Sergey Ivanovitch answered, smiling serenely,
as he extricated the bee, dark with honey and helplessly kicking,
and put it with the knife on a stout aspen leaf.

"But who has declared war on the Turks?--Ivan Ivanovitch Ragozov
and Countess Lidia Ivanovna, assisted by Madame Stahl?"

"No one has declared war, but people sympathize with their
neighbors' sufferings and are eager to help them," said Sergey
Ivanovitch.

"But the prince is not speaking of help," said Levin, coming to
the assistance of his father-in-law, "but of war.  The prince
says that private persons cannot take part in war without the
permission of the government."

"Kostya, mind, that's a bee!  Really, they'll sting us!" said
Dolly, waving away a wasp.

"But that's not a bee, it's a wasp," said Levin.

"Well now, well, what's your own theory?" Katavasov said to Levin
with a smile, distinctly challenging him to a discussion.  "Why
have not private persons the right to do so?"

"Oh, my theory's this: war is on one side such a beastly, cruel,
and awful thing, that no one man, not to speak of a Christian,
can individually take upon himself the responsibility of
beginning wars; that can only be done by a government, which is
called upon to do this, and is driven inevitably into war.  On
the other hand, both political science and common sense teach us
that in matters of state, and especially in the matter of war,
private citizens must forego their personal individual will."

Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had their replies ready, and both
began speaking at the same time.

"But the point is, my dear fellow, that there may be cases when
the government does not carry out the will of the citizens and
then the public asserts its will," said Katavasov.

But evidently Sergey Ivanovitch did not approve of this answer.
His brows contracted at Katavasov's words and he said something
else.

"You don't put the matter in its true light.  There is no
question here of a declaration of war, but simply the expression
of a human Christian feeling.  Our brothers, one with us in
religion and in race, are being massacred.  Even supposing they
were not our brothers nor fellow-Christians, but simply
children, women, old people, feeling is aroused and Russians go
eagerly to help in stopping these atrocities.  Fancy, if you were
going along the street and saw drunken men beating a woman or a
child--I imagine you would not stop to inquire whether war had
been declared on the men, but would throw yourself on them, and
protect the victim."

"But I should not kill them," said Levin.

"Yes, you would kill them."

"I don't know.  If I saw that, I might give way to my impulse of
the moment, but I can't say beforehand.  And such a momentary
impulse there is not, and there cannot be, in the case of the
oppression of the Slavonic peoples."

"Possibly for you there is not; but for others there is," said
Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning with displeasure.  "There are
traditions still extant among the people of Slavs of the true
faith suffering under the yoke of the 'unclean sons of Hagar.'
The people have heard of the sufferings of their brethren and
have spoken."

"Perhaps so," said Levin evasively; "but I don't see it.  I'm one
of the people myself, and I don't feel it."

"Here am I too," said the old prince.  "I've been staying abroad
and reading the papers, and I must own, up to the time of the
Bulgarian atrocities, I couldn't make out why it was all the
Russians were all of a sudden so fond of their Slavonic brethren,
while I didn't feel the slightest affection for them.  I was very
much upset, thought I was a monster, or that it was the influence
of Carlsbad on me.  But since I have been here, my mind's been
set at rest.  I see that there are people besides me who're only
interested in Russia, and not in their Slavonic brethren.  Here's
Konstantin too."

"Personal opinions mean nothing in such a case," said Sergey
Ivanovitch; "it's not a matter of personal opinions when all
Russia--the whole people--has expressed its will."

"But excuse me, I don't see that.  The people don't know anything
about it, if you come to that," said the old prince.

"Oh, papa!...how can you say that?  And last Sunday in church?"
said Dolly, listening to the conversation.  "Please give me a
cloth," she said to the old man, who was looking at the children
with a smile.  "Why, it's not possible that all..."

"But what was it in church on Sunday?  The priest had been told
to read that.  He read it.  They didn't understand a word of it.
Then they were told that there was to be a collection for a pious
object in church; well, they pulled out their halfpence and gave
them, but what for they couldn't say."

"The people cannot help knowing; the sense of their own destinies
is always in the people, and at such moments as the present that
sense finds utterance," said Sergey Ivanovitch with conviction,
glancing at the old bee-keeper.

The handsome old man, with black grizzled beard and thick silvery
hair, stood motionless, holding a cup of honey, looking down from
the height of his tall figure with friendly serenity at the
gentlefolk, obviously understanding nothing of their conversation
and not caring to understand it.

"That's so, no doubt," he said, with a significant shake of his
head at Sergey Ivanovitch's words.

"Here, then, ask him.  He knows nothing about it and thinks
nothing," said Levin.  "Have you heard about the war, Mihalitch?"
he said, turning to him.  "What they read in the church? What do
you think about it? Ought we to fight for the Christians?"

"What should we think? Alexander Nikolaevitch our Emperor has
thought for us; he thinks for us indeed in all things.  It's
clearer for him to see.  Shall I bring a bit more bread?  Give
the little lad some more?" he said addressing Darya Alexandrovna
and pointing to Grisha, who had finished his crust.

"I don't need to ask," said Sergey Ivanovitch, "we have seen and
are seeing hundreds and hundreds of people who give up everything
to serve a just cause, come from every part of Russia, and
directly and clearly express their thought and aim.  They bring
their halfpence or go themselves and say directly what for.  What
does it mean?"

"It means, to my thinking," said Levin, who was beginning to get
warm, "that among eighty millions of people there can always be
found not hundreds, as now, but tens of thousands of people who
have lost caste, ne'er-do-wells, who are always ready to go
anywhere--to Pogatchev's bands, to Khiva, to Serbia..."

"I tell you that it's not a case of hundreds or of
ne'er-do-wells, but the best representatives of the people!" said
Sergey Ivanovitch, with as much irritation as if he were
defending the last penny of his fortune.  "And what of the
subscriptions?  In this case it is a whole people directly
expressing their will."

"That word 'people' is so vague," said Levin.  "Parish clerks,
teachers, and one in a thousand of the peasants, maybe, know what
it's all about.  The rest of the eighty millions, like Mihalitch,
far from expressing their will, haven't the faintest idea what
there is for them to express their will about.  What right have
we to say that this is the people's will?"



Chapter 16


Sergey Ivanovitch, being practiced in argument, did not reply,
but at once turned the conversation to another aspect of the
subject.

"Oh, if you want to learn the spirit of the people by
arithmetical computation, of course it's very difficult to arrive
at it.  And voting has not been introduced among us and cannot be
introduced, for it does not express the will of the people; but
there are other ways of reaching that.  It is felt in the air, it
is felt by the heart.  I won't speak of those deep currents which
are astir in the still ocean of the people, and which are evident
to every unprejudiced man; let us look at society in the narrow
sense.  All the most diverse sections of the educated public,
hostile before, are merged in one.  Every division is at an end,
all the public organs say the same thing over and over again, all
feel the mighty torrent that has overtaken them and is carrying
them in one direction."

"Yes, all the newspapers do say the same thing," said the prince.
"That's true.  But so it is the same thing that all the frogs
croak before a storm.  One can hear nothing for them."

"Frogs or no frogs, I'm not the editor of a paper and I don't
want to defend them; but I am speaking of the unanimity in the
intellectual world," said Sergey Ivanovitch, addressing his
brother.  Levin would have answered, but the old prince
interrupted him.

"Well, about that unanimity, that's another thing, one may say,"
said the prince.  "There's my son-in-law, Stepan Arkadyevitch,
you know him.  He's got a place now on the committee of a
commission and something or other, I don't remember.  Only
there's nothing to do in it--why, Dolly, it's no secret!--and a
salary of eight thousand.  You try asking him whether his post is
of use, he'll prove to you that it's most necessary.  And he's a
truthful man too, but there's no refusing to believe in the
utility of eight thousand roubles."

"Yes, he asked me to give a message to Darya Alexandrovna about
the post," said Sergey Ivanovitch reluctantly, feeling the
prince's remark to be ill-timed.

"So it is with the unanimity of the press.  That's been explained
to me: as soon as there's war their incomes are doubled.  How can
they help believing in the destinies of the people and the
Slavonic races...and all that?"

"I don't care for many of the papers, but that's unjust," said
Sergey Ivanovitch.

"I would only make one condition," pursued the old prince.
"Alphonse Karr said a capital thing before the war with Prussia:
'You consider war to be inevitable?  Very good.  Let everyone who
advocates war be enrolled in a special regiment of
advance-guards, for the front of every storm, of every attack, to
lead them all!'"

"A nice lot the editors would make!" said Katavasov, with a loud
roar, as he pictured the editors he knew in this picked legion.

"But they'd run," said Dolly, "they'd only be in the way."

"Oh, if they ran away, then we'd have grape-shot or Cossacks with
whips behind them," said the prince.

"But that's a joke, and a poor one too, if you'll excuse my
saying so, prince," said Sergey Ivanovitch.

"I don't see that it was a joke, that..." Levin was beginning,
but Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted him.

"Every member of society is called upon to do his own special
work," said he.  "And men of thought are doing their work when
they express public opinion.  And the single-hearted and full
expression of public opinion is the service of the press and a
phenomenon to rejoice us at the same time.  Twenty years ago we
should have been silent, but now we have heard the voice of the
Russian people, which is ready to rise as one man and ready to
sacrifice itself for its oppressed brethren; that is a great step
and a proof of strength."

"But it's not only making a sacrifice, but killing Turks," said
Levin timidly.  "The people make sacrifices and are ready to make
sacrifices for their soul, but not for murder," he added,
instinctively connecting the conversation with the ideas that had
been absorbing his mind.

"For their soul?  That's a most puzzling expression for a natural
science man, do you understand?  What sort of thing is the soul?"
said Katavasov, smiling.

"Oh, you know!"

"No, by God, I haven't the faintest idea!" said Katavasov with a
loud roar of laughter.

"'I bring not peace, but a sword,' says Christ," Sergey
Ivanovitch rejoined for his part, quoting as simply as though it
were the easiest thing to understand the very passage that had
always puzzled Levin most.

"That's so, no doubt," the old man repeated again.  He was
standing near them and responded to a chance glance turned in his
direction.

"Ah, my dear fellow, you're defeated, utterly defeated!" cried
Katavasov good-humoredly.

Levin reddened with vexation, not at being defeated, but at
having failed to control himself and being drawn into argument.

"No, I can't argue with them," he thought; "they wear
impenetrable armor, while I'm naked."

He saw that it was impossible to convince his brother and
Katavasov, and he saw even less possibility of himself agreeing
with them.  What they advocated was the very pride of intellect
that had almost been his ruin.  He could not admit that some
dozens of men, among them his brother, had the right, on the
ground of what they were told by some hundreds of glib volunteers
swarming to the capital, to say that they and the newspapers were
expressing the will and feeling of the people, and a feeling
which was expressed in vengeance and murder.  He could not admit
this, because he neither saw the expression of such feelings in
the people among whom he was living, nor found them in himself
(and he could not but consider himself one of the persons making
up the Russian people), and most of all because he, like the
people, did not know and could not know what is for the general
good, though he knew beyond a doubt that this general good could
be attained only by the strict observance of that law of right
and wrong which has been revealed to every man, and therefore he
could not wish for war or advocate war for any general objects
whatever.  He said as Mihalitch did and the people, who had
expressed their feeling in the traditional invitations of the
Varyagi: "Be princes and rule over us.  Gladly we promise
complete submission.  All the labor, all humiliations, all
sacrifices we take upon ourselves; but we will not judge and
decide."  And now, according to Sergey Ivanovitch's account, the
people had foregone this privilege they had bought at such a
costly price.

He wanted to say too that if public opinion were an infallible
guide, then why were not revolutions and the commune as lawful as
the movement in favor of the Slavonic peoples?  But these were
merely thoughts that could settle nothing.  One thing could be
seen beyond doubt--that was that at the actual moment the
discussion was irritating Sergey Ivanovitch, and so it was wrong
to continue it.  And Levin ceased speaking and then called the
attention of his guests to the fact that the storm clouds were
gathering, and that they had better be going home before it
rained.



Chapter 17


The old prince and Sergey Ivanovitch got into the trap and drove
off; the rest of the party hastened homewards on foot.

But the storm-clouds, turning white and then black, moved down so
quickly that they had to quicken their pace to get home before
the rain.  The foremost clouds, lowering and black as soot-laden
smoke, rushed with extraordinary swiftness over the sky.  They
were still two hundred paces from home and a gust of wind had
already blown up, and every second the downpour might be looked
for.

The children ran ahead with frightened and gleeful shrieks.
Darya Alexandrovna, struggling painfully with her skirts that
clung round her legs, was not walking, but running, her eyes
fixed on the children.  The men of the party, holding their hats
on, strode with long steps beside her.  They were just at the
steps when a big drop fell splashing on the edge of the iron
guttering.  The children and their elders after them ran into the
shelter of the house, talking merrily.

"Katerina Alexandrovna?" Levin asked of Agafea Mihalovna, who met
them with kerchiefs and rugs in the hall.

"We thought she was with you," she said.

"And Mitya?"

"In the copse, he must be, and the nurse with him."

Levin snatched up the rugs and ran towards the copse.

In that brief interval of time the storm clouds had moved on,
covering the sun so completely that it was dark as an eclipse.
Stubbornly, as though insisting on its rights, the wind stopped
Levin, and tearing the leaves and flowers off the lime trees and
stripping the white birch branches into strange unseemly
nakedness, it twisted everything on one side--acacias, flowers,
burdocks, long grass, and tall tree-tops.  The peasant girls
working in the garden ran shrieking into shelter in the servants'
quarters.  The streaming rain had already flung its white veil
over all the distant forest and half the fields close by, and was
rapidly swooping down upon the copse.  The wet of the rain
spurting up in tiny drops could be smelt in the air.

Holding his head bent down before him, and struggling with the
wind that strove to tear the wraps away from him, Levin was
moving up to the copse and had just caught sight of something
white behind the oak tree, when there was a sudden flash, the
whole earth seemed on fire, and the vault of heaven seemed
crashing overhead.  Opening his blinded eyes, Levin gazed through
the thick veil of rain that separated him now from the copse, and
to his horror the first thing he saw was the green crest of the
familiar oak-tree in the middle of the copse uncannily changing
its position.  "Can it have been struck?" Levin hardly had time
to think when, moving more and more rapidly, the oak tree
vanished behind the other trees, and he heard the crash of the
great tree falling upon the others.

The flash of lightning, the crash of thunder, and the
instantaneous chill that ran through him were all merged for
Levin in one sense of terror.

"My God! my God! not on them!" he said.

And though he thought at once how senseless was his prayer that
they should not have been killed by the oak which had fallen now,
he repeated it, knowing that he could do nothing better than
utter this senseless prayer.

Running up to the place where they usually went, he did not find
them there.

They were at the other end of the copse under an old lime-tree;
they were calling him.  Two figures in dark dresses (they had
been light summer dresses when they started out) were standing
bending over something.  It was Kitty with the nurse.  The rain
was already ceasing, and it was beginning to get light when Levin
reached them.  The nurse was not wet on the lower part of her
dress, but Kitty was drenched through, and her soaked clothes
clung to her.  Though the rain was over, they still stood in the
same position in which they had been standing when the storm
broke.  Both stood bending over a perambulator with a green
umbrella.

"Alive?  Unhurt?  Thank God!" he said, splashing with his soaked
boots through the standing water and running up to them.

Kitty's rosy wet face was turned towards him, and she smiled
timidly under her shapeless sopped hat.

"Aren't you ashamed of yourself?  I can't think how you can be so
reckless!" he said angrily to his wife.

"It wasn't my fault, really.  We were just meaning to go, when he
made such a to-do that we had to change him.  We were just..."
Kitty began defending herself.

Mitya was unharmed, dry, and still fast asleep.

"Well, thank God!  I don't know what I'm saying!"

They gathered up the baby's wet belongings; the nurse picked up
the baby and carried it.  Levin walked beside his wife, and,
penitent for having been angry, he squeezed her hand when the
nurse was not looking.



Chapter 18


During the whole of that day, in the extremely different
conversations in which he took part, only as it were with the top
layer of his mind, in spite of the disappointment of not finding
the change he expected in himself, Levin had been all the while
joyfully conscious of the fulness of his heart.

After the rain it was too wet to go for a walk; besides, the
storm clouds still hung about the horizon, and gathered here and
there, black and thundery, on the rim of the sky.  The whole
party spent the rest of the day in the house.

No more discussions sprang up; on the contrary, after dinner
every one was in the most amiable frame of mind.

At first Katavasov amused the ladies by his original jokes, which
always pleased people on their first acquaintance with him.  Then
Sergey Ivanovitch induced him to tell them about the very
interesting observations he had made on the habits and
characteristics of common houseflies, and their life.  Sergey
Ivanovitch, too, was in good spirits, and at tea his brother drew
him on to explain his views of the future of the Eastern
question, and he spoke so simply and so well, that everyone
listened eagerly.

Kitty was the only one who did not hear it all--she was summoned
to give Mitya his bath.

A few minutes after Kitty had left the room she sent for Levin to
come to the nursery.

Leaving his tea, and regretfully interrupting the interesting
conversation, and at the same time uneasily wondering why he had
been sent for, as this only happened on important occasions,
Levin went to the nursery.

Although he had been much interested by Sergey Ivanovitch's views
of the new epoch in history that would be created by the
emancipation of forty millions of men of Slavonic race acting
with Russia, a conception quite new to him, and although he was
disturbed by uneasy wonder at being sent for by Kitty, as soon as
he came out of the drawing room and was alone, his mind reverted
at once to the thoughts of the morning.  And all the theories of
the significance of the Slav element in the history of the world
seemed to him so trivial compared with what was passing in his
own soul, that he instantly forgot it all and dropped back into
the same frame of mind that he had been in that morning.

He did not, as he had done at other times, recall the whole train
of thought--that he did not need.  He fell back at once into the
feeling which had guided him, which was connected with those
thoughts, and he found that feeling in his soul even stronger and
more definite than before.  He did not, as he had had to do with
previous attempts to find comforting arguments, need to revive a
whole chain of thought to find the feeling.  Now, on the
contrary, the feeling of joy and peace was keener than ever, and
thought could not keep pace with feeling.

He walked across the terrace and looked at two stars that had
come out in the darkening sky, and suddenly he remembered.  "Yes,
looking at the sky, I thought that the dome that I see is not a
deception, and then I thought something, I shirked facing
something," he mused.  "But whatever it was, there can be no
disproving it!  I have but to think, and all will come clear!"

Just as he was going into the nursery he remembered what it was
he had shirked facing.  It was that if the chief proof of the
Divinity was His revelation of what is right, how is it this
revelation is confined to the Christian church alone?  What
relation to this revelation have the beliefs of the Buddhists,
Mohammedans, who preached and did good too?

It seemed to him that he had an answer to this question; but he
had not time to formulate it to himself before he went into the
nursery.

Kitty was standing with her sleeves tucked up over the baby in
the bath.  Hearing her husband's footstep, she turned towards
him, summoning him to her with her smile.  With one hand she was
supporting the fat baby that lay floating and sprawling on its
back, while with the other she squeezed the sponge over him.

"Come, look, look!" she said, when her husband came up to her.
"Agafea Mihalovna's right.  He knows us!"

Mitya had on that day given unmistakable, incontestable signs of
recognizing all his friends.

As soon as Levin approached the bath, the experiment was tried,
and it was completely successful.  The cook, sent for with this
object, bent over the baby.  He frowned and shook his head
disapprovingly.  Kitty bent down to him, he gave her a beaming
smile, propped his little hands on the sponge and chirruped,
making such a queer little contented sound with his lips, that
Kitty and the nurse were not alone in their admiration.  Levin,
too, was surprised and delighted.

The baby was taken out of the bath, drenched with water, wrapped
in towels, dried, and after a piercing scream, handed to his
mother.

"Well, I am glad you are beginning to love him," said Kitty to
her husband, when she had settled herself comfortably in her
usual place, with the baby at her breast.  "I am so glad!  It had
begun to distress me.  You said you had no feeling for him."

"No; did I say that?  I only said I was disappointed."

"What! disappointed in him?"

"Not disappointed in him, but in my own feeling; I had expected
more.  I had expected a rush of new delightful emotion to come
as a surprise.  And then instead of that--disgust, pity..."

She listened attentively, looking at him over the baby, while she
put back on her slender fingers the rings she had taken off while
giving Mitya his bath.

"And most of all, at there being far more apprehension and pity
than pleasure.  Today, after that fright during the storm, I
understand how I love him."

Kitty's smile was radiant.

"Were you very much frightened?" she said.  "So was I too, but I
feel it more now that it's over.  I'm going to look at the oak.
How nice Katavasov is!  And what a happy day we've had
altogether.  And you're so nice with Sergey Ivanovitch, when you
care to be....  Well, go back to them.  It's always so hot and
steamy here after the bath."



Chapter 19


Going out of the nursery and being again alone, Levin went back
at once to the thought, in which there was something not clear.

Instead of going into the drawing room, where he heard voices, he
stopped on the terrace, and leaning his elbows on the parapet, he
gazed up at the sky.

It was quite dark now, and in the south, where he was looking,
there were no clouds.  The storm had drifted on to the opposite
side of the sky, and there were flashes of lightning and distant
thunder from that quarter.  Levin listened to the monotonous drip
from the lime trees in the garden, and looked at the triangle of
stars he knew so well, and the Milky Way with its branches that
ran through its midst.  At each flash of lightning the Milky Way,
and even the bright stars, vanished, but as soon as the lightning
died away, they reappeared in their places as though some hand
had flung them back with careful aim.

"Well, what is it perplexes me?" Levin said to himself, feeling
beforehand that the solution of his difficulties was ready in his
soul, though he did not know it yet.  "Yes, the one unmistakable,
incontestable manifestation of the Divinity is the law of right
and wrong, which has come into the world by revelation, and which
I feel in myself, and in the recognition of which--I don't make
myself, but whether I will or not--I am made one with other men
in one body of believers, which is called the church.  Well, but
the Jews, the Mohammedans, the Confucians, the Buddhists--what of
them?" he put to himself the question he had feared to face.
"Can these hundreds of millions of men be deprived of that
highest blessing without which life has no meaning?"  He pondered
a moment, but immediately corrected himself.  "But what am I
questioning?" he said to himself.  "I am questioning the relation
to Divinity of all the different religions of all mankind.  I am
questioning the universal manifestation of God to all the world
with all those misty blurs.  What am I about?  To me
individually, to my heart has been revealed a knowledge beyond
all doubt, and unattainable by reason, and here I am obstinately
trying to express that knowledge in reason and words.

"Don't I know that the stars don't move?" he asked himself,
gazing at the bright planet which had shifted its position up to
the topmost twig of the birch-tree.  "But looking at the
movements of the stars, I can't picture to myself the rotation of
the earth, and I'm right in saying that the stars move.

"And could the astronomers have understood and calculated
anything, if they had taken into account all the complicated and
varied motions of the earth?  All the marvelous conclusions they
have reached about the distances, weights, movements, and
deflections of the heavenly bodies are only founded on the
apparent motions of the heavenly bodies about a stationary earth,
on that very motion I see before me now, which has been so for
millions of men during long ages, and was and will be always
alike, and can always be trusted.  And just as the conclusions of
the astronomers would have been vain and uncertain if not founded
on observations of the seen heavens, in relation to a single
meridian and a single horizon, so would my conclusions be vain
and uncertain if not founded on that conception of right, which
has been and will be always alike for all men, which has been
revealed to me as a Christian, and which can always be trusted in
my soul.  The question of other religions and their relations to
Divinity I have no right to decide, and no possibility of
deciding."

"Oh, you haven't gone in then?" he heard Kitty's voice all at
once, as she came by the same way to the drawing-room.

"What is it? you're not worried about anything?" she said,
looking intently at his face in the starlight.

But she could not have seen his face if a flash of lightning had
not hidden the stars and revealed it.  In that flash she saw his
face distinctly, and seeing him calm and happy, she smiled at
him.

"She understands," he thought; "she knows what I'm thinking
about.  Shall I tell her or not?  Yes, I'll tell her." But at the
moment he was about to speak, she began speaking.

"Kostya! do something for me," she said; "go into the corner room
and see if they've made it all right for Sergey Ivanovitch.  I
can't very well.  See if they've put the new wash stand in it."

"Very well, I'll go directly," said Levin, standing up and
kissing her.

"No, I'd better not speak of it," he thought, when she had gone
in before him.  "It is a secret for me alone, of vital importance
for me, and not to be put into words.

"This new feeling has not changed me, has not made me happy and
enlightened all of a sudden, as I had dreamed, just like the
feeling for my child.  There was no surprise in this either.
Faith--or not faith--I don't know what it is--but this feeling
has come just as imperceptibly through suffering, and has taken
firm root in my soul.

"I shall go on in the same way, losing my temper with Ivan the
coachman, falling into angry discussions, expressing my opinions
tactlessly; there will be still the same wall between the holy of
holies of my soul and other people, even my wife; I shall still
go on scolding her for my own terror, and being remorseful for
it; I shall still be as unable to understand with my reason why
I pray, and I shall still go on praying; but my life now, my
whole life apart from anything that can happen to me, every
minute of it is no more meaningless, as it was before, but it has
the positive meaning of goodness, which I have the power to put
into it."








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Anna Karenina, by Leo Tolstoy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNA KARENINA ***

***** This file should be named 1399-8.txt or 1399-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/9/1399/

Etext prepared by David Brannan

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
